[page 1]
CHGNet: Pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed
atomistic modeling
Bowen Deng,1, 2 Peichen Zhong,1, 2, ∗ KyuJung Jun,1, 2 Janosh Riebesell, 2, 3
Kevin Han,2 Christopher J. Bartel, 1, 4 and Gerbrand Ceder 1, 2, †
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, United States
2Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, California 94720, United States
3Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
4Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States
(Dated: June 22, 2023)
The simulation of large-scale systems with complex electron interactions remains one of the great-
est challenges for the atomistic modeling of materials. Although classical force fields often fail to
describe the coupling between electronic states and ionic rearrangements, the more accurateab-initio
molecular dynamics suffers from computational complexity that prevents long-time and large-scale
simulations, which are essential to study many technologically relevant phenomena, such as reac-
tions, ion migrations, phase transformations, and degradation.
In this work, we present the Crystal Hamiltonian Graph neural Network (CHGNet) as a novel
machine-learning interatomic potential (MLIP), using a graph-neural-network-based force field to
model a universal potential energy surface. CHGNet is pretrained on the energies, forces, stresses,
and magnetic moments from the Materials Project Trajectory Dataset, which consists of over 10
years of density functional theory static and relaxation trajectories of ∼ 1.5 million inorganic struc-
tures. The explicit inclusion of magnetic moments enables CHGNet to learn and accurately represent
the orbital occupancy of electrons, enhancing its capability to describe both atomic and electronic
degrees of freedom. We demonstrate several applications of CHGNet in solid-state materials, in-
cluding charge-informed molecular dynamics in Li xMnO2, the finite temperature phase diagram for
LixFePO4 and Li diffusion in garnet conductors. We critically analyze the significance of includ-
ing charge information for capturing appropriate chemistry, and we provide new insights into ionic
systems with additional electronic degrees of freedom that can not be observed by previous MLIPs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large-scale simulations, such as molecular dynamics
(MD), are essential tools in the computational explo-
ration of solid-state materials [1]. They enable the study
of reactivity, degradation, interfacial reactions, transport
in partially disordered structures, and other heteroge-
neous phenomena relevant for the application of complex
materials in technology. Technological relevance of such
simulations requires rigorous chemical specificity which
originates from the orbital occupancy of atoms. Despite
their importance, accurate modeling of electron interac-
tions or their subtle effects in MD simulations remains
a major challenge. Classical force fields treat the charge
as an atomic property that is assigned to every atom
a-priori [2, 3]. Methodology developments in the field
of polarizable force fields such as the electronegativity
equalization method (EEM) [4], chemical potential equal-
ization (CPE) [5], and charge equilibration (Qeq) [6] re-
alize charge evolution via the redistribution of atomic
partial charge. However, these empirical methods are
often not accurate enough to capture complex electron
interactions.
∗ zhongpc@berkeley.edu
† gceder@berkeley.edu
Ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) with density
functional theory (DFT) can produce high-fidelity re-
sults with quantum-mechanical accuracy by explicitly
computing the electronic structure within the density
functional approximation. The charge-density distribu-
tion and corresponding energy can be obtained by solv-
ing the Kohn–Sham equation [7]. Long-time and large-
scale spin-polarized AIMD simulations critical for study-
ing ion migrations, phase transformations and chemical
reactions are challenging and extremely computing in-
tensive [8, 9]. These difficulties underscore the need for
more efficient computational methods in the field that
can account for charged ions and their orbital occupancy
at sufficient time and length scales needed to model im-
portant phenomena.
Machine-learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) such
as ænet [10, 11] and DeepMD [12] have provided promis-
ing solutions to bridge the gap between expensive elec-
tronic structure methods and efficient classical inter-
atomic potentials. Specifically, graph neural network
(GNN)-based MLIPs such as DimeNet [13], NequIP
[14], TeaNet [15], and MACE [16] have been shown to
achieve state-of-the-art performance by incorporating in-
variant/equivariant symmetry constraints and long-range
interaction through graph convolution [17]. Most re-
cently, GNN-based MLIPs trained on the periodic ta-
ble (e.g., M3GNet) have demonstrated the possibility
arXiv:2302.14231v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Jun 2023

[page 2]
2
(c)
𝑒!"𝑒"#𝑎!"#
(b)
Bond Graph 𝐺$
(d)
𝑣!𝑣"𝑣#𝑒!"𝑒"#
Atom Graph 𝐺%
AtomConv
BondConv
AngleUpdate
𝑣!&𝑒!"&
𝑣!&'(
𝑎!"#&
𝑣!&'(𝑒!"&'(
𝑣!&'(𝑒!"&'(𝑎!"#&'(
𝐺%𝑒̃!"%	
𝐺$𝑒̃!"$
𝐺$
Interaction BlockSmoothRBF
Emb
𝑟⃗!"Θ!"#
𝑒̃!"𝑎*!"#Fourier
𝑣!)𝑒!")𝑎!"#)
Interaction Block
𝐺(𝑍!,𝑥⃗!)
EmbEmb
×𝑛−1𝑣!*+(Linear𝑣!*FC𝐸𝑚!
AutoDiff𝐸,𝑥⃗!,𝜀𝑓⃗!,𝜎Sum𝐸!
EnergyForcesStressMagmoms
2+3+2-
3-
?+?-?+?-
(a)
(e)𝑣!&𝑒!"&
𝐺%
gatedMLP
𝑒̃!"%WeightedAggr𝑚!"&
𝑣!&∥𝑣"&∥𝑒!"&
Linear+𝑣!&'(
Convolution Layer
FIG. 1. CHGNet model architecture (a) CHGNet workflow: a crystal structure with unknown atomic charge is used as
input to predict the energy, force, stress, and magnetic moments, resulting in a charge-decorated structure. (b) Atom graph:
The pairwise bond information is drawn between atoms; Bond graph: the pairwise angle information is drawn between bonds.
(c) Graphs run through basis expansions and embedding layers to create atom, bond, angle features. The features are updated
through several interaction blocks, and the properties are predicted at output layers. (d) Interaction block in which the atom,
bond, and angle share and update information. (e) Atom convolution layer where neighboring atom and bond information is
calculated through weighted message passing and aggregates to the atoms.
of universal interatomic potentials that may not require
chemistry-specific training for each new application [18–
20]. However, the inclusion of the important effects that
valences have on chemical bonding remains a challenge
for MLIPs, and the early success derived mostly from
the inclusion of electrostatics for long-range interactions
[21–23].
The importance of an ion’s valence derives from the
fact that it can engage in very different bonding with
its environment depending on its electron count. While
traditional MLIPs treat the elemental label as the ba-
sic chemical identity, different valence states of transi-
tion metal ions behave as different from each other as
different elements. For example, high spin Mn 4+ is a
non-bonding spherical ion which almost always resides in
octahedral coordination by oxygen atoms, whereas Mn3+
is a Jahn–Teller active ion that radically distorts its envi-
ronment, and Mn2+ is an ion that strongly prefers tetra-
hedral coordination [8]. Such strong chemical interaction
variability across different valence states exists for almost
all transition metal ions and requires specification of an
ion beyond its chemical identity. In addition, the charge
state is a degree of freedom that can create configura-
tional entropy and whose dynamic optimization can lead
to strongly coupled charge and ion motion, which is im-
possible to capture with a MLIP that only carries ele-
mental labels. The relevance of explicit electron physics
motivates the development of a robust MLIP model with
charge information built in.
Charge has been represented in a variety of ways, from
a simple oxidation state label to continuous wave func-
tions derived from quantum mechanics [24]. Challenges
in incorporating charge information into MLIPs arise
from many factors, such as the ambiguity of represen-
tations [25], complexity of interpretation [26], scarcity
of labels [22], and impracticality of taking charge as
an input ( E({ri}, {qi}), as the labels {qi} are gener-
ally not a-priori available) [21]. In this work, we de-
fine charge as an atomic property ( atomic charge ) that
can be inferred from the inclusion of magnetic moments
(magmoms). We show that by explicitly incorporating
the site-specific magmoms as the charge-state constraints

[page 3]
3
into the Crystal Hamiltonian Graph neural- Network
(CHGNet), one can both enhance the latent-space regu-
larization and accurately capture electron interactions.
We demonstrate the charge constraints and latent-
space regularization of atomic charge in Na 2V2(PO4)3
and show the applications of CHGNet in the study of
charge-transfer and phase transformation in Li xMnO2,
electronic entropy in the Li xFePO4 phase diagram, and
Li diffusivity in garnet-type Li-superionic conductors
Li3+xLa3Te2O12. By critically comparing and evaluat-
ing the importance of incorporating charge information
in the construction of CHGNet, we offer new insights into
the materials modeling of ionic systems with additional
electronic degrees of freedom. Our analysis highlights the
essential role that charge information plays in atomistic
simulations for solid-state materials.
II. RESULTS
A. CHGNet architecture
The foundation of CHGNet is a GNN, as shown in Fig.
1, where the graph convolution layer is used to prop-
agate atomic information via a set of nodes {vi} con-
nected by edges {eij}. The translation, rotation, and
permutation invariance are preserved in GNNs [27–29].
Figure 1(a) shows the workflow of CHGNet which takes
a crystal structure with unknown atomic charges as in-
put and outputs the corresponding energy, forces, stress,
and magmoms. The charge-decorated structure can be
inferred from the on-site magnetic moments and atomic
orbital theory. The details are described in the following
section.
In CHGNet, a periodic crystal structure is converted
into an atom graph Ga by searching for neighboring
atoms vj within rcut of each atom vi in the primitive
cell. The edges eij are drawn with information from the
pairwise distance between vi and vj, as shown in Fig.
1(b). Three-body interaction can be computed by using
an auxiliary bond graph Gb, which can be similarly con-
structed by taking the angle aijk as the pairwise informa-
tion between bonds eij and ejk (see Methods). We adopt
similar approaches to include the angular/three-body in-
formation as other recent GNN MLIPs [13, 18, 30].
Figure 1(c) shows the architecture of CHGNet, which
consists of a sequence of basis expansions, embeddings,
interaction blocks, and outputs layers (see Methods for
details). Figure 1(d) illustrates the components within
an interaction block, where the atomic interaction is sim-
ulated with the update of atom, bond, and angle fea-
tures via the convolution layers. Figure 1(e) presents the
convolution layer in the atom graph. Weighted message
passing is used to propagate information between atoms,
where the message weight ˜ea
ij from node j to node i de-
cays to zero at the graph cutoff radius to ensure smooth-
ness of the potential energy surface [13].
Unlike other GNNs, where the updated atom features
{vn
i } after n convolution layers are directly used to pre-
dict energies, CHGNet regularizes the node-wise features
{vn−1
i } at the n − 1 convolution layer to contain the
information about magnetic moments. The regularized
features {vn−1
i } carry rich information about both local
ionic environments and charge distribution. Therefore,
the atom features {vn
i } used to predict energy, force, and
stress are charge-constrained by their charge-state infor-
mation. As a result, CHGNet can provide charge-state
information using only the nuclear positions and atomic
identities as input, allowing the study of charge distribu-
tion in atomistic modeling.
B. Materials Project Trajectory Dataset
The Materials Project database contains a vast collec-
tion of DFT calculations on ∼ 146, 000 inorganic ma-
terials composed of 94 elements [31]. To accurately
sample the universal potential energy surface, we ex-
tracted ∼ 1.37 million Materials Project tasks of struc-
ture relaxation and static calculations using either the
generalized gradient approximation (GGA) or GGA+ U
exchange-correlation (see Methods). This effort resulted
in a comprehensive dataset with 1,580,395 atom configu-
rations, 1,580,395 energies, 7,944,833 magnetic moments,
49,295,660 forces, and 14,223,555 stresses. To ensure
the consistency of energies within the MPtrj dataset, we
applied the GGA/GGA+ U mixing compatibility correc-
tion, as described by Wang et al. [32].
The distribution of elements in the MPtrj dataset is il-
lustrated in Fig. 2. The lower-left triangle (warm color)
in an element’s box indicates the frequency of occur-
rence of that element in the dataset, and the upper-right
triangle (cold color) represents the number of instances
where magnetic information is available for the element.
With over 100,000 occurrences for 60 different elements
and more than 10,000 instances with magnetic informa-
tion for 76 different elements, the MPtrj dataset provides
comprehensive coverage of all chemistries, excluding only
the noble gases and actinoids. The lower boxes in Fig. 2
present the counts and mean absolute deviations of en-
ergy, force, stress, and magmoms in the MPtrj dataset.
C. Performance Evaluation
CHGNet with 400,438 trainable parameters was
trained on the MPtrj dataset with an 8:1:1 training, val-
idation, and test set ratio, partitioned by materials (see
Methods). The statistics of the mean absolute errors of
the energy, force, stress, and magmoms on the MPtrj test
set structures are shown in Table I. We observe a simi-
lar test set error with slight improvements in the model
trained with magmoms.
To evaluate the robustness of CHGNet as a universal
force field, we submitted CHGNet to Matbench Discov-
ery [33] for out-of-distribution material stability predic-

[page 4]
4
FIG. 2. Element distribution of Materials Project Trajectory (MPtrj) Dataset. The color on the lower-left triangle
indicates the total number of atoms/ions of an element. The color on the upper right indicates the number of times the
atoms/ions are incorporated with magnetic moment labels in the MPtrj dataset. On the lower part of the plot is the count
and mean absolute deviation (MAD) of energy, magmoms, force, and stress
tion. CHGNet achieves state-of-the-art performance in
high-throughput stable inorganic crystal discovery com-
pared to 8 other models submitted to this benchmark at
the time of writing.
For a benchmark on CHGNet molecular dynamic sim-
ulations, we applied the pretrained CHGNet to MD sim-
ulations on Li superionic conductors that were previously
reported with AIMD [34]. Supplementary Fig. 1 shows
that CHGNet systematically agrees with AIMD results
on room temperature conductivities and activation ener-
gies within the AIMD error bar, and CHGNet success-
fully distinguishes the faster and slower conductors that
were identified with DFT.
TABLE I. Mean-absolute-errors (MAEs) of CHGNet on
MPtrj test set of 157,955 structures from 14,572 materials.
’With mag’ and ’No mag’ indicate whether the model is
trained with magmoms ( µB is the Bohr magneton).
Energy
(meV/atom)
Force
(meV/˚A)
Stress
(GPa)
Magmom
(µB)
With mag 30 77 0.348 0.032
No mag 33 79 0.351 N/A
D. Charge-constraints and charge-inference from
magnetic moments
In solid-state materials that contain heterovalent ions,
it is crucial to distinguish the atomic charge of the ions,

[page 5]
5
(a) (b)
V3+
V4+V?+
V3+
V4+
V?+DFT reference
FIG. 3. Magmom and hidden-space regularization in
Na2V2(PO4)3. (a) Magmom distribution of the 216 V ions
in the unrelaxed structure (blue) and CHGNet-relaxed struc-
ture (orange). (b) A two-dimensional visualization of the
PCA on V-ion embedding vectors before the magmom pro-
jection layer indicates the latent space clustering is highly
correlated with magmoms and charge information. The PCA
reduction is calculated for both unrelaxed and relaxed struc-
tures.
as an element’s interaction with its environment can de-
pend strongly on its valence state. It is well known that
the valence of heterovalent ions cannot be directly calcu-
lated through the DFT charge density because the charge
density is almost invariant to the valence state due to the
hybridization shift with neighboring ligand ions [35, 36].
Furthermore, the accurate representation and encoding
of the full charge density is another demanding task re-
quiring substantial computational resources [26, 37]. An
established approach is to rely on the magnetic moment
for a given atom site as an indicator of its atomic charge,
which can be derived from the difference in localized up-
spin and down-spin electron densities in spin-polarized
DFT calculations [8, 38]. Compared with the direct use
of charge density, magmoms are found to contain more
comprehensive information regarding the electron orbital
occupancy and therefore the chemical behavior of ions,
as demonstrated in previous studies.
To rationalize our treatment of the atomic charge,
we used a NASICON-type Na-ion cathode material
Na4V2(PO4)3 as an illustrative example. The phase sta-
bility of the (de-)intercalated material Na4−xV2(PO4)3 is
associated with Na/vacancy ordering and is highly corre-
lated to the charge ordering on the vanadium sites [39].
We generated a supercell structure of Na4V2(PO4)3 with
2268 atoms and randomly removed half of the Na ions to
generate the structure with composition Na 2V2(PO4)3,
where half of the V ions are oxidized to a V 4+ state. We
used CHGNet to relax the (de-)intercalated structure and
analyze its capability to distinguish the valence states of
V atoms with the ionic relaxation (see Methods).
Figure 3(a) shows the distribution of predicted mag-
moms on all V ions in the unrelaxed (blue) and relaxed
(orange) structures. Without any prior knowledge about
the V-ion charge distribution other than learning from
the spatial coordination of the V nuclei, CHGNet suc-
cessfully differentiated the V ions into two groups of V3+
and V 4+. Figure 3(b) shows the two-dimensional prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) of all the latent space
feature vectors of V ions for both unrelaxed and relaxed
structures after three interaction blocks. The PCA anal-
ysis demonstrates two well-separated distributions, in-
dicating the latent space feature vectors of V ions are
strongly correlated to the different valence states of V.
Hence, imposing different magmom labels to the latent
space (i.e., forcing the two orange peaks to converge to
the red dashed lines in Fig. 3(a)) would act as the charge
constraints for the model by regularizing the latent-space
features.
Because energy, force, and stress are calculated from
the same feature vectors, the inclusion of magmoms can
improve the featurization of the heterovalent atoms in
different local chemical environments (e.g., V3+ and V4+
displays very distinct physics and chemistry) and there-
fore improve the accuracy and expressibility of CHGNet.
E. Charge disproportionation in Li xMnO2 phase
transformation
The long-time and large-scale simulation of CHGNet
enables studies of ionic rearrangements coupled with
charge transfer [40, 41], which is crucial for ion mobil-
ity and the accurate representation of the interaction be-
tween ionic species. As an example, in the LiMnO 2 bat-
tery cathode material, transition-metal migration plays
a central role in its phase transformations, which cause
irreversible capacity loss [42, 43]. The mechanism of Mn
migration is strongly coupled with charge transfer, with
Mn4+ being an immobile ion, and Mn3+ and Mn2+ gener-
ally considered to be more mobile [44–46]. The dynamics
of the coupling of the electronic degrees of freedom with
those of the ions has been challenging to study but is
crucial to understand the phase transformation from or-
thorhombic LiMnO 2 (o-LMO, shown in Fig. 4(a)) to
spinel LiMnO2 (s-LMO), as the time scale and computa-
tional cost of such phenomena are far beyond any possible
ab-initio methods.
In early quasi-static ab-initio studies, Reed et al.
[40] rationalized the remarkable speed at which the
phase transformation proceeds at room temperature us-
ing a charge disproportionation mechanism: 2Mn 3+
oct →
Mn2+
tet + Mn4+
oct, where the subscript indicates location in
the tetrahedral or octahedral site of a face-centered cubic
oxygen packing, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The hypothesis
based on DFT calculations was that Mn 2+ had a lower
energy barrier for migration between tetrahedral and oc-
tahedral sites and preferred to occupy the tetrahedral
site. The ability therefore for Mn to dynamically change
its valence would explain its remarkable room temper-
ature mobility. However, Jang et al. [44] showed in a
later magnetic characterization experiment that the elec-
trochemically transformed spinel LiMnO 2 has lower-spin
(high-valence) Mn ions on the tetrahedral sites, which
suggested the possibility that Mn with higher valence can

[page 6]
6
o-LMO
LiMnO
Average Magmom(𝜇!)(a)(b) (c)
2𝜃(degree)
Mn2+
Mn3+
Mntet
Mnoct
oct-sitetet-site
Time (ns)
s-LMOpeakso-LMOpeaks
(d)
Mn2+Mn3+
GGA+UCHGNet
(e)
 4.404.204.25
3.653.793.93
4.314.414.26
3.783.963.61
0.4ns
 4.544.464.524.404.39
4.37
4.344.364.28
4.584.454.54
1.5ns
-1062-1059-1056
4.543.5300.30.60.91.21.5
Magmom(𝜇!)Energy(eV)
Time (ns)
Mn2+Mn3+Mn4+
FIG. 4. Li0.5MnO2 phase transformation and charge disproportionation (a) orthorhombic LiMnO2 (o-LMO) unit cell
plotted with the tetrahedral site and the octahedral site. (b) Simulated XRD pattern of CHGNet MD structures as the system
transforms from the o-LMO phase to the s-LMO. (c) Average magmoms of tetrahedral and octahedral Mn ions vs. time. (d)
Top: total potential energy and the relative intensity of o-LMO and s-LMO characteristic peaks vs. time. The solid black
line is averaged over every 10 ps. Bottom: the histogram of magmoms on all Mn ions vs. time. The brighter color indicates
more Mn ions distributed at the magmom. (e) Predicted magmoms of tetrahedral Mn ions using GGA+ U-DFT (black) and
CHGNet (blue), where the structures are drawn from MD simulation at 0.4 ns (left) and 1.5 ns (right).
be stable on tetrahedral sites during the phase transfor-
mation.
To demonstrate the ability of CHGNet to fully de-
scribe such a process, we used CHGNet to run a charge-
informed MD simulation at 1100 K for 1.5 ns (see
Methods). The MD simulation started from a partially
delithiated supercell structure with the o-LMO structure
(Li20Mn40O80), which is characterized by peaks at 15 °,
26°, and 40° in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (the
bottom line in Fig. 4(b)). As the simulation proceeded,
a phase transformation from orthorhombic ordering to
spinel-like ordering was observed. Figure 4(b) presents
the simulated XRD pattern of MD structures at differ-
ent time intervals from 0 to 1.5 ns, with a clear increase in
the characteristic spinel peaks (18 °, 35 °) and a decrease
in the orthorhombic peak. The simulated results agree
well with the experimental in-situ XRD results [42, 44].
Figure 4(d) presents the CHGNet-predicted energy of
the LMO supercell structure as a function of simulation
time, together with the peak strength at 2 θ = 15 ◦ and
18◦. An explicit correlation between the structural trans-
formation and energy landscape is observed. The pre-
dicted average potential energy of the spinel phase is ap-
proximately 50 meV/oxygen lower than that of the start-

[page 7]
7
ing o-LMO, suggesting that the phase transformation to
spinel is indeed, thermodynamically favored.
The advantage of CHGNet is shown in its ability to
predict charge-coupled physics, as evidenced by the lower
plot in Fig. 4(d). A histogram of the magmoms of all
the Mn ions in the structure is presented against time.
In the early part of the simulation, the magmoms of Mn
ions are mostly distributed between 3µB and 4µB, which
correspond to Mn 4+ and Mn 3+. At approximately 0.8
ns, there is a significant increase in the amount of Mn 2+,
which is accompanied by a decrease in the potential en-
ergy and changes in the XRD peaks. Following this ma-
jor transformation point, the Mn 3+ ions undergo charge
disproportionation, resulting in the coexistence of Mn 2+,
Mn3+, and Mn4+ in the transformed spinel-like structure.
One important observation from the long-time charge-
informed MD simulation is the correlation between ionic
rearrangements and the charge-state evolution. Specifi-
cally, we noticed that the time scale of charge dispropor-
tionation (∼ ns for the emergence of Mn 2+) is far longer
than the time scale of ion hops (∼ ps for the emergence of
Mntet), indicating that the migration of Mn to the tetra-
hedral coordination is less likely related to the emergence
of Mn2+. Instead, our result indicates that the emergence
of Mn2+
tet is correlated to the formation of the long-range
spinel-like ordering. Figure 4(c) shows the average mag-
moms of Mn tet and Mn oct as a function of time. The
result reveals that Mn 2+
tet only forms over a long time pe-
riod, which cannot be observed using any conventional
simulation techniques.
To further validate this hypothesis and the accuracy
of CHGNet prediction, we used GGA+ U and r 2SCAN-
DFT (see Supplementary Information) static calculations
to get the magmoms of the structures at 0.4 and 1.5
ns, where the GGA+ U results are shown in Fig. 4(e).
CHGNet (blue) shows highly accurate agreement with
GGA+U magmoms (black) and infers the same Mn tet
valence states.
F. Electronic entropy effect in the phase diagram
of Li xFePO4
The configurational electronic entropy has a significant
effect on the temperature-dependent phase stability of
mixed-valence oxides, and its equilibrium modeling there-
fore requires an explicit indication of the atomic charge.
However, no current MLIPs can provide such informa-
tion. We demonstrate that using CHGNet one can infer
the atomic charge and include the electronic entropy in
the computation of the temperature-dependent phase di-
agram (PD) of Li xFePO4.
Previous research has shown that the formation of a
solid solution in Li xFePO4 is mainly driven by electronic
entropy rather than by Li +/vacancy configurational en-
tropy [47]. We applied CHGNet as an energy calcula-
tor to generate two distinct cluster expansions (CEs),
which is a typical approach to studying configurational
(a)
(b)
FIG. 5. LixFePO4 phase diagram from CHGNet . The
phase diagrams in (a) and (b) are calculated with and with-
out electronic entropy on Fe 2+ and Fe3+. The colored dots
represent the stable phases obtained in semi-grand canonical
MC. The dashed lines indicate the two-phase equilibria be-
tween solid solution phases.
entropy [48]. One of these is charge-decorated (consid-
ering Li +/vacancy and Fe 2+/Fe3+) and another is non-
charge-decorated (only considering Li+/vacancy without
consideration of the Fe valence). Semi-grand canonical
Monte Carlo was used to sample these cluster expan-
sions and construct Li xFePO4 PDs (see Methods). The
calculated PD with charge decoration in Fig. 5(a) fea-
tures a miscibility gap between FePO 4 and LiFePO 4,
with a eutectoid-like transition to the solid-solution phase
at intermediate Li concentration, qualitatively matching
the experiment result [49, 50]. In contrast, the calcu-
lated PD without charge decoration in Fig. 5(b) features
only a single miscibility gap without any eutectoid tran-
sitions, in disagreement with experiments. This compar-
ison highlights the importance of explicit inclusion of the
electronic degrees of freedom, as failure to do so can result
in incorrect physics. These experiments show how prac-
titioners may benefit from CHGNet with atomic charge
inference for equilibrium modeling of configurationally
and electronically disordered systems.
G. Activated Li diffusion network in Li 3La3Te2O12
In this section, we showcase the precision of CHGNet
for general-purpose MD. Lithium-ion diffusivity in fast
Li-ion conductors is known to show a drastic non-linear
response to compositional change. For example, stuffing
a small amount of excess lithium into stoichiometric com-

[page 8]
8
FIG. 6. Li diffusivity in garnet Li 3La3Te2O12. The
CHGNet simulation accurately reproduces the dramatic in-
crease in Li-ion diffusivity when a small amount of extra Li is
stuffed into the garnet structure, qualitatively matching the
activated diffusion network theory and agreeing well with the
DFT-computed activation energy.
positions can result in orders-of-magnitude improvement
of the ionic conductivity [34]. Xiao et al. [51] reported
that the activation energy of Li diffusion in stoichiomet-
ric garnet Li 3La3Te2O12 decreases from more than 1 eV
to ∼160 meV in a slightly stuffed Li 3+δ garnet ( δ =
1/48), owing to the activated Li diffusion network of face-
sharing tetrahedral and octahedral sites.
We performed a zero-shot test to assess the ability of
CHGNet to capture the effect of such slight composi-
tional change on the diffusivity and its activation energy.
Figure 6 shows the Arrhenius plot from CHGNet-based
MD simulations and compares it to AIMD results. Our
results indicate that not only is the activated diffusion
network effect precisely captured, the activation energies
from CHGNet are also in excellent agreement with the
DFT results [51]. This effort demonstrates the capability
of CHGNet to precisely capture the strong interactions
between Li ions in activated local environments and the
ability to simulate highly non-linear diffusion behavior.
Moreover, CHGNet can dramatically decrease the error
on simulated diffusivity and enable studies in systems
with poor diffusivity such as the unstuffed Li 3 garnet by
extending to nano-second-scale simulations [52].
III. DISCUSSION
Large-scale computational modeling has proven essen-
tial in providing atomic-level information in materials
science, medical science, and molecular biology. Many
technologically relevant applications contain heterovalent
species, for which a comprehensive understanding of the
atomic charge involved in the dynamics of processes is of
great interest. The importance of assigning a valence to
ions derives from the fundamentally different electronic
and bonding behavior ions can exhibit when their elec-
tron count changes. Ab-initio calculations based on DFT
are useful for these problems, but the ∼ O (N 3) scaling
intrinsically prohibits its application to large time- and
length-scales. Recent development of MLIPs provides
new opportunities to increase computational efficiency
while maintaining near DFT accuracy. The present work
presents an MLIP that combines the need to include the
electronic degrees of freedom with computational effi-
ciency.
In this work, we developed CHGNet and demonstrated
the effectiveness of incorporating magnetic moments as a
proxy for inferring the atomic charge in atomistic sim-
ulations, which results in the integration of electronic
information and the imposition of additional charge con-
straints as a regularization of the MLIP. We highlight the
capability of CHGNet in distinguishing Fe2+/Fe3+ in the
study of LixFePO4, which is essential for the inclusion of
electronic entropy and finite temperature phase stability.
In the study of LiMnO2, we demonstrate CHGNet’s abil-
ity to gain new insights into the relation between charge
disproportionation and phase transformation in a het-
erovalent transition-metal oxide system from long-time
charge-informed MD.
CHGNet builds on recent advances in graph-based
MLIPs [13, 18], but is pretrained with electronic degrees
of freedom built in, which provides an ideal solution for
high-throughput screening and atomistic modeling of a
variety of technologically relevant oxides, including high-
entropy materials [53, 54]. As CHGNet is already gen-
eralized to broad chemistry during pretraining, it can
also serve as a data-efficient model for high-precision
simulations when augmented with fine-tuning to specific
chemistries.
Despite these advances, further improvements can be
achieved through several efforts. First, the use of mag-
netic moments for valence states inference does not
strictly ensure global charge neutrality. The formal va-
lence assignment depends on how the atomic charges are
partitioned [24]. Second, although magnetic moments are
good heuristics for the atomic charge from spin-polarized
calculations in ionic systems, it is recognized that the
atomic charge inference for non-magnetic ions may be
ambiguous and thus requires extra domain knowledge.
As a result, for ions with no magnetic moment, the
atom-centered magnetic moments cannot accurately re-
flect their atomic charges and CHGNet will infer charge
from the environment similar to how other MLIP’s func-
tion. It may also be possible to enhance the model fur-
ther by incorporating other approaches to charge repre-
sentation, such as an electron localization function [55],
electric polarization [56], and atomic orbital-based parti-
tioning (e.g., Wannier functions [57]). These approaches
could be used for atom feature engineering in latent
space.
In conclusion, CHGNet enables charge-informed atom-

[page 9]
9
istic simulations amenable to the study of heterovalent
systems using large-scale computational simulations, ex-
panding opportunities to study charge-transfer-coupled
phenomena in computational chemistry, physics, biology,
and materials science.
IV. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the U.S. Department of En-
ergy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences,
Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under Con-
tract No. DE-AC0205CH11231 (Materials Project pro-
gram KC23MP). The work was also supported by the
computational resources provided by the Extreme Sci-
ence and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE),
supported by National Science Foundation grant num-
ber ACI1053575; the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of En-
ergy Office of Science User Facility located at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory; and the Lawrencium
Computational Cluster resource provided by the IT Divi-
sion at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The
authors would also like to thank Jason Munro and Luis
Barroso-Luque for helpful discussions.
V. METHODS
A. Data parsing
The Materials Project Trajectory Dataset (MPtrj)
was parsed from the September 2022 Materials Project
database version. We collected all the GGA and GGA+U
task trajectories under each material-id and followed the
criteria below:
1. We removed deprecated tasks and only kept tasks
with the same calculation settings as the primary
task, from which the material could be searched
on the Materials Project website. To verify if the
calculation settings were equal, we confirmed the
following: (1) The + U setting must be the same as
the primary task. (2) The energy of the final frame
cannot differ by more than 20 meV/atom from the
primary task.
2. Structures without energy and forces or electronic
step convergence were removed.
3. Structures with energy higher than 1 eV/atom or
lower than 10 meV/atom relative to the relaxed
structure from Materials Project’s ThermoDoc were
filtered out to eliminate large energy differences
caused by variations in VASP settings, etc.
4. Duplicate structures were removed to maintain
a healthy data distribution. This removal was
achieved using a pymatgen StructureMatcher and
an energy matcher to tell the difference between
structures. The screening criteria of the struc-
ture and energy matchers became more stringent as
more structures under the same materials-id were
added to the MPtrj dataset.
Training, validation, and test sets of the MPtrj dataset
were randomly selected based on the 145,923 compounds
(based on the mp-id). As a result, different DFT tasks
and their trajectory frames can only be included in the
same set conditioned on the compound.
B. Model design
In constructing the crystal graph, the default rcut is
set to 5 ˚A, which has been shown adequate enough for
capturing long-range interactions [18]. The bond graph
is constructed with a cutoff of 3 ˚A for computational effi-
ciency. The bond distances rij were expanded to ˜eij by
a trainable smooth radial Bessel function (SmoothRBF),
as proposed in Gasteiger et al. [13]. The SmoothRBF
forces the radial Bessel function and its derivative to ap-
proach zero at the graph cutoff radius, thus guarantee-
ing a smooth potential energy surface. The angles θijk
were expanded by Fourier basis functions to create ˜ aijk
with trainable frequency. The atomic numbers Zi, ˜eij,
and ˜aijk were then embedded into node v0
i , edge e0
ij, and
angle features a0
ijk (all have 64 feature dimensions by de-
fault):
v0
i = ZiWv + bv,
e0
ij,n = ˜eijWe, ˜eij =
r
2
5
sin( nπrij
5 )
rij
⊙ u(rij)
a0
ijk,ℓ =



1√
2π if ℓ = 0
1√π cos [ℓθijk] if ℓ = [1, N]
1√π sin [(ℓ − N)θijk] if ℓ = [N + 1, 2N]
,
(1)
where {W , b} are the trainable weights and bias. The an-
gle is computed using θijk = arccos eij ·ejk
|eij ||ejk |. The u(rij)
is a polynomial envelope function to enforce the value,
the first and second derivative of ˜eij, smoothly toward 0
at the graph cutoff radius [13]. The subscripts n, ℓ are
the expansion orders, and we set the maximum orders
for both n and ℓ to be 2 N + 1 = 9. The superscript
denotes the index of the interaction block. The ⊙ repre-
sents the element-wise multiplication. The edge vectors
et
ij are bi-directional, which is essential for et
ij and et
ji to
be represented as a single node in the bond graph [30].
Different from previous GNN models such as M3GNet
[18], where three-body spherical harmonics features are
used to update bond features, we explicitly encode and
update atoms, bonds, and angles embeddings through
the pair-wise connections pre-defined in atom graph and
bond graph. For the atom graph convolution, a weighted
message passing layer is applied to the concatenated fea-
ture vectors ( vt
i ||vt
j||et
ij) from two atoms and one bond.

[page 10]
10
For the bond graph convolution, the weighted message
passing layer is applied to the concatenated feature vec-
tors ( et
ij||et
jk ||at
ijk ||vt+1
j ) from two bonds, the angle be-
tween them, and the atom where the angle is located.
For the angle update function, we used the same con-
struction for the bond graph message vector but without
the weighted aggregation step. The mathematical form
of the atom, bond, and angle updates are formulated be-
low:
vt+1
i = vt
i + Lt
v

X
j
˜eij · ϕt
v
 
vt
i ||vt
j||et
ij


 ,
et+1
jk = et
jk + Lt
v
"X
i
˜eij · ˜ejk · ϕt
e
 
et
ij||et
jk ||at
ijk ||vt+1
j

#
,
at+1
ijk,f = at
ijk + ϕt
a

et+1
ij ||et+1
jk ||at
ijk ||vt+1
j

.
(2)
The L is a linear layer and ϕ is the gated multilayer
perceptron (gatedMLP) [29]:
L(x) = xW + b,
ϕ(x) = (σ ◦ Lgate(x)) ⊙ (g ◦ Lcore(x)) , (3)
where σ and g are the Sigmoid and SiLU activation func-
tions, respectively. The magnetic moments are predicted
by a linear projection of the atom features v3
i after three
interaction blocks by
mi = Lm(v3
i ). (4)
Instead of using a full interaction block, the last convo-
lution layer only includes atom graph convolution
v4
i = v3
i +
X
j
˜eij · ϕ3
v
 
v3
i ||v3
j ||e3
ij

. (5)
The energy is calculated by a non-linear projection of the
site-wise averaged feature vector over all atoms{v4
i }. The
forces and stress are calculated via auto-differentiation of
the energy with respect to the atomic Cartesian coordi-
nates and strain:
Etot =
X
i
L3 ◦ g ◦ L2 ◦ g ◦ L1(v4
i ),
⃗fi = − ∂Etot
∂⃗ xi
,
σ = 1
V
∂Etot
∂ε .
(6)
Overall, with four atom convolution layers, the pre-
trained CHGNet can capture long-range interaction up
to 20 ˚A with a small computation cost.
C. Model training
The model is trained to minimize the summation of
Huber loss (with δ = 0 .1) of energy, force, stress, and
magmoms:
L(x, ˆx) =
(
0.5 · (x − ˆx)2 if |x − ˆx| < δ
δ · (|x − ˆx| − 0.5δ) otherwise . (7)
The loss function is a weighted sum of the contribu-
tions from energy, forces, stress, and magmoms:
L = L(E, ˆE) + wf L(f , ˆf) + wσL(σ, ˆσ) + wmL(m, ˆm),
(8)
where the weights for the forces, stress, and magmoms are
set to wf = 1, wσ = 0.1, and wm = 0.1, respectively. The
DFT energies are normalized with elemental reference
energies before fitting to CHGNet to decrease variances
[18]. The absolute values of DFT magmoms are used
for training. The batch size is set to 40 and the Adam
optimizer is used with 10 −3 as the initial learning rate.
The CosineAnnealingLR scheduler is used to adjust the
learning rate 10 times per epoch, and the final learning
rate decays to 10 −5 after 20 epochs.
D. Software interface
CHGNet was implemented using pytorch 1.12.0
[58], with crystal structure processing from pymatgen
[59]. Molecular dynamics and structure relaxation were
simulated using the interface to Atomic Simulation
Environment (ASE) [60]. The cluster expansions were
performed using the smol package [61].
E. Structure relaxation and molecular dynamics
All the structure relaxations were optimized by the
FIRE optimizer over the potential energy surface provided
by CHGNet [62], where the atom positions, cell shape,
and cell volume were simultaneously optimized to reach
converged interatomic forces of 0.1 eV/ ˚A.
For the MD simulations of theo-LMO to s-LMO phase
transformation, the initial structure Li 20Mn40O80 was
generated by randomly removing Li from a Li40Mn40O80
supercell of the orthorhombic structure and relaxing with
DFT. The MD simulation was run under the NVT en-
semble, with a time step of 2 fs at T = 1100 K for 1.5
ns. For the simulated XRD in Fig. 4(b), the structures
at 0.0, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2, and 1.5 ns were coarse-grained
to their nearest Wyckoff positions to remove noisy peaks.
In Fig. 4(c), Mn oct and Mntet were determined by count-
ing the number of bonding oxygen ions within 2.52 ˚A. If
six bonding oxygen ions were found, then the Mn ion is
categorized into Mn oct; if less than six bonding oxygen
ions were found, the Mn ion is coarse-grained into Mn tet
for representation of lower coordinated environments. In
Fig. 4(e), Mn 2+ and Mn 3+ are classified by CHGNet
magmom threshold of 4.2 µB [38].
For the MD simulations of garnet Li 3La3Te2O12 sys-
tems, a time step of 2 fs was used. We ramped up the

[page 11]
11
temperature to the targeted temperature in the NVT en-
semble with at least 1 ps. Then, after equilibrating the
system for 50 ps, the lithium self-diffusion coefficients
were obtained by calculating the mean squared displace-
ments of trajectories for at least 2.3 ns. The uncertainty
analysis of the diffusion coefficient values was conducted
following the empirical error estimation scheme proposed
by He et al. [63]. In Li 3+δ, the excess lithium was stuffed
to an intermediate octahedral (48 g) site to face-share
with the fully occupied 24 d tetrahedral sites.
F. Phase diagram calculations
The cluster expansions (CEs) of Li xFePO4 were per-
formed with pair interactions up to 11 ˚A and triplet in-
teractions up to 7 ˚A based on the relaxed unit cell of
LiFePO4. For better energy accuracy, we first fine-tuned
CHGNet with the Materials Project structures in the Li-
Fe-P-O chemical space, which decreased the test error
from 23 meV/atom to 15 meV/atom (see Supplementary
Information). We applied CHGNet to relax 456 differ-
ent structures in Li xFePO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and predict the
energies and magmoms, where the 456 structures were
generated via an automatic workflow including CE fit-
ting, canonical CE Monte Carlo for searching the ground
state at varied Li+ composition and CHGNet relaxation.
The charge-decorated CE is defined on coupled sublat-
tices over Li+/vacancy and Fe2+/Fe3+ sites, where Fe2+
and Fe3+ are treated as different species. In addition, the
non-charge-decorated CE is defined only on Li+/vacancy
sites. In the charge-decorated CE, Fe2+/Fe3+ is classified
with magmom in [3µB, 4µB] and [4µB, 5µB], respectively
[38].
The semigrand canonical Monte Carlo simulations
were implemented using the Metropolis–Hastings algo-
rithm, where 20% of the MC steps were implemented
canonically (swapping Li +/vacancy or Fe 2+/Fe3+) and
80% of the MC steps were implemented grand-
canonically using the table-exchange method [64, 65].
The simulations were implemented on a 8 × 6 × 4 of
the unit cell of LiFePO 4. In each MC simulation, we
scanned the chemical potential in the [ −5.6, −4.8] range
with a step of 0 .01 and sampled the temperatures from
0 to 1000 K. The boundary for the solid solution stable
phases is determined with a difference in the Li concen-
tration < 0.05 by ∆µ = 0.01 eV.
The effects of configurational and electronic entropy
can be investigated via S(Li, e) = S′(Li)+ S′(e)+ I(Li, e)
as described in Ref. [47]. S′ represents the conditional
entropy S(X|Y ) from X (either Li or e) degree of freedom
given fixed Y (e or Li), and I(Li, e) denotes the mutual in-
formation of the two degrees of freedom. S′(e/Li) can be
acquired from a canonical MC with frozen configuration
of either Li/vacancy or Fe 2+/Fe3+ ordering. This oper-
ation is facilitated by explicitly incorporating the charge
decoration degree of freedom with the cluster expansion,
a necessity substantiated by the atomic charge inference
derived from CHGNet.
G. DFT calculations
DFT calculations were performed with the Vienna ab
initio simulation package (VASP) using the projector-
augmented wave method [66, 67], a plane-wave basis set
with an energy cutoff of 520 eV, and a reciprocal space
discretization of 25 k-points per ˚A−1. All the calculations
were converged to 10 −6 eV in total energy for electronic
loops and 0.02 eV/˚A in interatomic forces for ionic loops.
We used the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) general-
ized gradient approximation exchange-correlation func-
tional [68] with rotationally-averaged Hubbard U correc-
tion (GGA+U) to compensate for the self-interaction er-
ror on transition metal atoms (3.9 eV for Mn) [69].
VI. AVAILABILITY
A. Code availability
The source code, pretrained weights, and example
notebooks of CHGNet on the MPtrj dataset are avail-
able at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/chgnet.
B. Data availability
The dataset will be released after review.
VII. COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
[1] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding molecular simu-
lation: from algorithms to applications , Vol. 1 (Elsevier,
2001).
[2] T. R. Lucas, B. A. Bauer, and S. Patel, Charge equili-
bration force fields for molecular dynamics simulations of
lipids, bilayers, and integral membrane protein systems,
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Biomembranes
1818, 318–329 (2012).
[3] R. Drautz, Atomic cluster expansion of scalar, vectorial,
and tensorial properties including magnetism and charge
transfer, Physical Review B 102, 024104 (2020).
[4] W. J. Mortier, S. K. Ghosh, and S. Shankar,
Electronegativity-equalization method for the calculation
of atomic charges in molecules, Journal of the American

[page 12]
12
Chemical Society 108, 4315–4320 (1986).
[5] D. M. York and W. Yang, A chemical potential equaliza-
tion method for molecular simulations, The Journal of
Chemical Physics 104, 159–172 (1996).
[6] A. K. Rappe and W. A. Goddard, Charge equilibration
for molecular dynamics simulations, The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry 95, 3358–3363 (1991).
[7] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in-
cluding exchange and correlation effects, Physical Review
140, A1133 (1965).
[8] J. Reed and G. Ceder, Role of electronic structure in the
susceptibility of metastable transition-metal oxide struc-
tures to transformation, Chemical Reviews 104, 4513
(2004).
[9] D. Eum, B. Kim, S. J. Kim, H. Park, J. Wu, S.-P.
Cho, G. Yoon, M. H. Lee, S.-K. Jung, W. Yang, W. M.
Seong, K. Ku, O. Tamwattana, S. K. Park, I. Hwang, and
K. Kang, Voltage decay and redox asymmetry mitigation
by reversible cation migration in lithium-rich layered ox-
ide electrodes, Nature Materials 19, 419 (2020).
[10] N. Artrith, T. Morawietz, and J. Behler, High-
dimensional neural-network potentials for multicompo-
nent systems: Applications to zinc oxide, Physical Re-
view B 83, 153101 (2011).
[11] J. Lopez-Zorrilla, X. M. Aretxabaleta, I. Yue, I. Etxebar-
ria, H. Manzano, and N. Artrith, ænet-PyTorch: a GPU-
supported implementation for machine learning atomic
potentials training, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09406
(2023).
[12] L. Zhang, H. Wang, R. Car, and W. E, Phase Diagram of
a Deep Potential Water Model, Physical Review Letters
126, 236001 (2021).
[13] J. Gasteiger, J. Groß, and S. G¨ unnemann, Directional
message passing for molecular graphs, in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2020).
[14] S. Batzner, A. Musaelian, L. Sun, M. Geiger, J. P.
Mailoa, M. Kornbluth, N. Molinari, T. E. Smidt, and
B. Kozinsky, E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for
data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials, Nature
Communications 13, 2453 (2022).
[15] S. Takamoto, S. Izumi, and J. Li, Teanet: Universal neu-
ral network interatomic potential inspired by iterative
electronic relaxations, Computational Materials Science
207, 111280 (2022).
[16] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. N. C. Simm, C. Ortner,
and G. Csanyi, MACE: Higher order equivariant message
passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields,
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
edited by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho
(2022).
[17] X. Fu, Z. Wu, W. Wang, T. Xie, S. Keten, R. Gomez-
Bombarelli, and T. Jaakkola, Forces are not Enough:
Benchmark and Critical Evaluation for Machine Learning
Force Fields with Molecular Simulations, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.07237 (2022).
[18] C. Chen and S. P. Ong, A universal graph deep learn-
ing interatomic potential for the periodic table, Nature
Computational Science 2, 718–728 (2022).
[19] K. Choudhary, B. DeCost, L. Major, K. Butler, J. Thiya-
galingam, and F. Tavazza, Unified graph neural network
force-field for the periodic table: solid state applications,
Digital Discovery (2023).
[20] S. Takamoto, C. Shinagawa, D. Motoki, K. Nak-
ago, W. Li, I. Kurata, T. Watanabe, Y. Yayama,
H. Iriguchi, Y. Asano, T. Onodera, T. Ishii, T. Kudo,
H. Ono, R. Sawada, R. Ishitani, M. Ong, T. Yam-
aguchi, T. Kataoka, A. Hayashi, N. Charoenphakdee, and
T. Ibuka, Towards universal neural network potential for
material discovery applicable to arbitrary combination of
45 elements, Nature Communications 13, 2991 (2022).
[21] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, M. Gastegger, K. T. Sch¨ utt,
H. E. Sauceda, and K.-R. M¨ uller, Spookynet: Learning
force fields with electronic degrees of freedom and nonlo-
cal effects, Nature Communications 12, 7273 (2021).
[22] T. W. Ko, J. A. Finkler, S. Goedecker, and J. Behler, A
fourth-generation high-dimensional neural network po-
tential with accurate electrostatics including non-local
charge transfer, Nature Communications 12, 398 (2021).
[23] R. Zubatyuk, J. S. Smith, B. T. Nebgen, S. Tretiak, and
O. Isayev, Teaching a neural network to attach and de-
tach electrons from molecules, Nature Communications
12, 4870 (2021).
[24] A. Walsh, A. A. Sokol, J. Buckeridge, D. O. Scanlon, and
C. R. A. Catlow, Oxidation states and ionicity, Nature
Materials 17, 958 (2018).
[25] X. Xie, K. A. Persson, and D. W. Small, Incorporating
electronic information into machine learning potential en-
ergy surfaces via approaching the ground-state electronic
energy as a function of atom-based electronic popula-
tions, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 16,
4256–4270 (2020).
[26] S. Gong, T. Xie, T. Zhu, S. Wang, E. R. Fadel, Y. Li,
and J. C. Grossman, Predicting charge density distribu-
tion of materials using a local-environment-based graph
convolutional network, Physical Review B 100, 184103
(2019).
[27] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. LeCun, Spec-
tral networks and locally connected networks on graphs,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203 (2013).
[28] M. Geiger and T. Smidt, e3nn: Euclidean neural net-
works, arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09453 (2022).
[29] T. Xie and J. C. Grossman, Crystal graph convolutional
neural networks for an accurate and interpretable predic-
tion of material properties, Physical Review Letters 120,
145301 (2018).
[30] K. Choudhary and B. DeCost, Atomistic line graph neu-
ral network for improved materials property predictions,
npj Computational Materials 7, 185 (2021).
[31] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards,
S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder,
and K. A. Persson, Commentary: The Materials Project:
A materials genome approach to accelerating materials
innovation, APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013).
[32] A. Wang, R. Kingsbury, M. McDermott, M. Horton,
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, S. Dwaraknath, and K. A. Persson,
A framework for quantifying uncertainty in DFT energy
corrections, Scientific Reports 11, 15496 (2021).
[33] J. Riebesell, Rhy. Goodall, A. Jain, K. Pers-
son, A. Lee, Matbench Discovery: Can machine
learning identify stable crystals? https://matbench-
discovery.materialsproject.org.
[34] K. Jun, Y. Sun, Y. Xiao, Y. Zeng, R. Kim, H. Kim, L. J.
Miara, D. Im, Y. Wang, and G. Ceder, Lithium superi-
onic conductors with corner-sharing frameworks, Nature
Materials 21, 924–931 (2022).
[35] W. Mackrodt, N. Harrison, V. Saunders, N. Allan, and
M. Towler, Direct evidence of O(p) holes in Li-doped NiO
from Hartree-Fock calculations, Chemical Physics Letters

[page 13]
13
250, 66 (1996).
[36] C. Wolverton and A. Zunger, First-principles prediction
of vacancy order-disorder and intercalation battery volt-
ages in LixCoO2, Physical Review Letters81, 606 (1998).
[37] Z. Qiao, A. S. Christensen, M. Welborn, F. R. Manby,
A. Anandkumar, and T. F. Miller, Informing geomet-
ric deep learning with electronic interactions to accel-
erate quantum chemistry, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 119, 1 (2022).
[38] L. Barroso-Luque, P. Zhong, J. H. Yang, F. Xie, T. Chen,
B. Ouyang, and G. Ceder, Cluster expansions of multi-
component ionic materials: Formalism and methodology,
Physical Review B 106, 144202 (2022).
[39] Z. Wang, S. Park, Z. Deng, D. Carlier, J.-N. Chotard,
L. Croguennec, G. S. Gautam, A. K. Cheetham,
C. Masquelier, and P. Canepa, Phase stability and
sodium-vacancy orderings in a NaSICON electrode, Jour-
nal of Materials Chemistry A 10, 209 (2022).
[40] J. Reed, G. Ceder, and A. V. D. Ven, Layered-to-
Spinel Phase Transition in Li xMnO2, Electrochemical
and Solid-State Letters 4, A78 (2001).
[41] K. Kang and G. Ceder, Factors that affect Li mobility in
layered lithium transition metal oxides, Physical Review
B 74, 094105 (2006).
[42] J. N. Reimers, E. W. Fuller, E. Rossen, and J. R. Dahn,
Synthesis and Electrochemical Studies of LiMnO2 Pre-
pared at Low Temperatures, Journal of The Electrochem-
ical Society 140, 3396–3401 (1993).
[43] I. Koetschau, M. N. Richard, J. R. Dahn, J. B. Soupart,
and J. C. Rousche, Orthorhombic LiMnO2 as a High Ca-
pacity Cathode for Li-Ion Cells, Journal of The Electro-
chemical Society 142, 2906–2910 (1995).
[44] Y.-I. Jang, F. Chou, B. Huang, D. R. Sadoway, and
Y.-M. Chiang, Magnetic characterization of orthorhom-
bic LiMnO 2 and electrochemically transformed spinel
LixMnO2 (x < 1), Journal of Physics and Chemistry of
Solids 64, 2525–2533 (2003).
[45] M. R. Jo, Y. Kim, J. Yang, M. Jeong, K. Song, Y.-I. Kim,
J.-M. Lim, M. Cho, J.-H. Shim, Y.-M. Kim, W.-S. Yoon,
and Y.-M. Kang, Triggered reversible phase transforma-
tion between layered and spinel structure in manganese-
based layered compounds, Nature Communications 10,
3385 (2019).
[46] M. D. Radin, J. Vinckeviciute, R. Seshadri, and A. Van
der Ven, Manganese oxidation as the origin of the anoma-
lous capacity of Mn-containing Li-excess cathode mate-
rials, Nature Energy 4, 639 (2019).
[47] F. Zhou, T. Maxisch, and G. Ceder, Configurational Elec-
tronic Entropy and the Phase Diagram of Mixed-Valence
Oxides: The Case of Li xFePO4, Physical Review Letters
97, 155704 (2006).
[48] A. Walle and G. Ceder, Automating first-principles phase
diagram calculations, Journal of Phase Equilibria23, 348
(2002).
[49] C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, J.-M. Tarascon, and C. Masque-
lier, The existence of a temperature-driven solid solution
in LixFePO4 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, Nature Materials 4, 254–260
(2005).
[50] J. L. Dodd, R. Yazami, and B. Fultz, Phase Diagram
of LixFePO4, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters 9,
A151 (2006).
[51] Y. Xiao, K. Jun, Y. Wang, L. J. Miara, Q. Tu, and
G. Ceder, Lithium Oxide Superionic Conductors Inspired
by Garnet and NASICON Structures, Advanced Energy
Materials 11, 2101437 (2021).
[52] J. Huang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Cheng, and
W. E, Deep potential generation scheme and simulation
protocol for the Li10GeP2S12-type superionic conductors,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 154, 094703 (2021).
[53] Z. Lun, B. Ouyang, D.-h. Kwon, Y. Ha, E. E. Foley, T.-
Y. Huang, Z. Cai, H. Kim, M. Balasubramanian, Y. Sun,
J. Huang, Y. Tian, H. Kim, B. D. McCloskey, W. Yang,
R. J. Cl´ ement, H. Ji, and G. Ceder, Cation-disordered
rocksalt-type high-entropy cathodes for Li-ion batteries,
Nature Materials 20, 214 (2021).
[54] Y. Sun and S. Dai, High-entropy materials for catalysis:
A new frontier, Science Advances 7, 1 (2021).
[55] B. Silvi and A. Savin, Classification of chemical bonds
based on topological analysis of electron localization
functions, Nature 371, 683 (1994).
[56] R. King-Smith and D. Vanderbilt, Theory of polarization
of crystalline solids, Physical Review B 47, 1651 (1993).
[57] L. Zhang, H. Wang, M. C. Muniz, A. Z. Panagiotopoulos,
R. Car, and W. E, A deep potential model with long-
range electrostatic interactions, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 156, 124107 (2022).
[58] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury,
G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga,
et al. , Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library, Advances in neural information
processing systems 32 (2019).
[59] S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier,
M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A.
Persson, and G. Ceder, Python Materials Genomics (py-
matgen): A robust, open-source python library for mate-
rials analysis, Computational Materials Science 68, 314
(2013).
[60] A. H. Larsen, J. J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E.
Castelli, R. Christensen, M. Du lak, J. Friis, M. N.
Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, et al. , The atomic sim-
ulation environment—a Python library for working with
atoms, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 273002
(2017).
[61] L. Barroso-Luque, J. H. Yang, F. Xie, T. Chen, R. L.
Kam, Z. Jadidi, P. Zhong, and G. Ceder, smol: A Python
package for cluster expansions and beyond, Journal of
Open Source Software 7, 4504 (2022).
[62] E. Bitzek, P. Koskinen, F. G¨ ahler, M. Moseler, and
P. Gumbsch, Structural relaxation made simple, Phys-
ical Review Letters 97, 1 (2006).
[63] X. He, Y. Zhu, A. Epstein, and Y. Mo, Statistical vari-
ances of diffusional properties from ab initio molecular
dynamics simulations, npj Computational Materials 4,
18 (2018).
[64] F. Xie, P. Zhong, L. Barroso-Luque, B. Ouyang, and
G. Ceder, Semigrand-canonical Monte-Carlo simulation
methods for charge-decorated cluster expansions, Com-
putational Materials Science 218, 112000 (2023).
[65] Z. Deng, G. Sai Gautam, S. K. Kolli, J.-N. Chotard,
A. K. Cheetham, C. Masquelier, and P. Canepa, Phase
Behavior in Rhombohedral NaSiCON Electrolytes and
Electrodes, Chemistry of Materials 32, 7908 (2020).
[66] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨ uller, Efficiency of ab-initio total
energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using
a plane-wave basis set, Computational Materials Science
6, 15 (1996).
[67] G. Kresse and D. Joubert, From ultrasoft 