[page 1]
A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry
Ilyes Batatia†1, Philipp Benner†2, Yuan Chiang†3,4, Alin M. Elena†17, Dávid P. Kovács†1,
Janosh Riebesell†4,13, Xavier R. Advincula12,13, Mark Asta3,4, Matthew Avaylon30, William
J. Baldwin1, Fabian Berger12, Noam Bernstein11, Arghya Bhowmik25, Filippo Bigi32,
Samuel M. Blau10, Vlad Cărare1,13, Michele Ceriotti32, Sanggyu Chong32, James P. Darby1,
Sandip De18, Flaviano Della Pia12, Volker L. Deringer16, Rokas Elijošius1, Zakariya
El-Machachi16, Fabio Falcioni31, Edvin Fako18, Andrea C. Ferrari26, John L. A. Gardner16,
Mikołaj J. Gawkowski38, Annalena Genreith-Schriever12, Janine George2,6, Rhys E. A.
Goodall15, Jonas Grandel6,2, Clare P. Grey12, Petr Grigorev27,36, Shuang Han18, Will
Handley13,19, Hendrik H. Heenen9, Kersti Hermansson23, Christian Holm22, Cheuk Hin Ho5,
Stephan Hofmann1, Jad Jaafar1, Konstantin S. Jakob9, Hyunwook Jung9, Venkat
Kapil12, 38, Aaron D. Kaplan4, Nima Karimitari20, James R. Kermode28, Panagiotis
Kourtis24, Namu Kroupa13,19,1, Jolla Kullgren23, Matthew C. Kuner3,4, Domantas Kuryla12,
Guoda Liepuoniute1,26, Chen Lin1,35, Johannes T. Margraf8, Ioan-Bogdan Magdău24,
Angelos Michaelides12, J. Harry Moore1, Aakash A. Naik2,6, Samuel P. Niblett12, Sam
Walton Norwood25, Niamh O’Neill12,13, Christoph Ortner5, Kristin A. Persson3,4,7, Karsten
Reuter9, Andrew S. Rosen33, Louise A. M. Rosset16, Lars L. Schaaf1, Christoph Schran13,
Benjamin X. Shi12, Eric Sivonxay10, Tamás K. Stenczel1, Viktor Svahn23, Christopher
Sutton20, Thomas D. Swinburne27,37, Jules Tilly31, Cas van der Oord1, Santiago Vargas29,
Eszter Varga-Umbrich1, Tejs Vegge25, Martin Vondrák8,9, Yangshuai Wang5, William C.
Witt14, Thomas Wolf34, Fabian Zills22, and Gábor Csányi∗1
1Engineering Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Trumpington St and JJ Thomson Ave,
Cambridge, UK
2Federal Institute of Materials Research and Testing (BAM), Berlin, Germany
3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA
4Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA
5Mathematics Department, University of British Columbia, 1984 Mathematics Rd,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2, Canada
6Institute of Condensed Matter Theory and Solid State Optics, Friedrich Schiller
University Jena, Germany
7Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA
8University of Bayreuth, Bavarian Center for Battery Technology (BayBatt), Bayreuth,
Germany
9Fritz-Haber-Institute of the Max-Planck-Society, Berlin, Germany
10Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA
†These authors, ordered alphabetically, contributed equally. All others, except for the corresponding
author, are also ordered alphabetically.
∗Corresponding author: gc121@cam.ac.uk
1
arXiv:2401.00096v3  [physics.chem-ph]  4 Sep 2025

[page 2]
11U. S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington DC 20375, USA
12Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road,
Cambridge, UK
13Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, J. J. Thomson Ave, Cambridge, UK
14Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, 27 Charles
Babbage Road, CB3 0FS, Cambridge, United Kingdom
15Chemix, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
16Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX1 3QR, UK
17Scientific Computing Department, Science and Technology Facilities Council, Daresbury
Laboratory, Keckwick Lane, Daresbury WA4 4AD, UK
18BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Straße 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany
19Kavli Institute for Cosmology, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge
CB3 0HA, UK
20Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina, South
Carolina 29208, USA
22Institute for Computational Physics, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
23Department of Chemistry–Ångström, Uppsala University, Box 538, S-751 21, Uppsala,
Sweden
24School of Natural and Environmental Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK
25Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Anker
Engelunds Vej 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
26Cambridge Graphene Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 0FA, UK
27Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, CINaM UMR 7325, Campus de Luminy, 13288
Marseille, France
28Warwick Centre for Predictive Modelling, School of Engineering, University of Warwick,
Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
29Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California – Los Angeles, 607
Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA, 90095 USA
30Computing Sciences Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA
31InstaDeep, London, W2 1AY, United Kingdom
32Laboratory of Computational Science and Modeling, Institute of Materials, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
33Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
08544, USA
34Hugging Face Inc., Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA
35Information Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PA, UK
36CNRS, INSA Lyon, Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, MATEIS, UMR5510, 69621
Villeurbanne, France
37Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA
38Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT,
UK
2

[page 3]
September 8, 2025
Atomistic simulations of matter, especially those that leverage first-principles (ab
initio) electronic structure theory, provide a microscopic view of the world, under-
pinning much of our understanding of chemistry and materials science. Over the
last decade or so, machine-learned force fields have transformed atomistic model-
ing by enabling simulations ofab initio quality over unprecedented time and length
scales. However, early ML force fields have largely been limited by: (i) the sub-
stantial computational and human effort of developing and validating potentials for
each particular system of interest; and (ii) a general lack of transferability from one
chemical system to the next. Here we show that it is possible to create a general-
purpose atomistic ML model, trained on a public dataset of moderate size, that is
capable of running stable molecular dynamics for a wide range of molecules and ma-
terials. We demonstrate the power of the MACE-MP-0 model — and its qualitative
and at times quantitative accuracy — on a diverse set of problems in the physical
sciences, including properties of solids, liquids, gases, chemical reactions, interfaces
and even the dynamics of a small protein. The model can be applied out of the
box as a starting or “foundation” model for any atomistic system of interest and,
when desired, can be fine-tuned on just a handful of application-specific data points
to reach ab initio accuracy. Establishing that a stable force-field model can cover
almost all materials changes atomistic modeling in a fundamental way: experienced
users get reliable results much faster, and beginners face a lower barrier to entry.
Foundation models thus represent a step towards democratising the revolution in
atomic-scale modeling that has been brought about by ML force fields.
1 Introduction
An overarching goal in the field of atomistic modeling is to develop an interatomic potential (alternatively
also called a “force field”) that quickly and accurately predicts the total energy and atomic forces for an
arbitrary chemical structure. Existing methods are not capable of this feat: whileab initio methods such
as density functional theory (DFT) (1–7) are widely applicable and accurate, their high computational cost
prohibits their use in many important cases, including high-throughput workflows and those in which large
(≫1000 atom) systems need to be simulated over long timescales. Conversely, empirical force-field models
that use simple functional forms are extremely cheap and so quick to use, but fail to accurately capture the
important subtleties of the many-body interactions between collections of atoms induced by quantum me-
chanics (8). Finally, modern machine-learning based interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are capable of faithfully
approximating ab initio methods for orders of magnitude less cost, but typically require significant upfront
investment and human effort when generating and labeling the training dataset (9–17). Furthermore, these
datasets and models typically need to be re-developed from scratch for each new system of interest (18). As a
remedy to these issues, and as a step towards a truly universal MLIP, we present MACE-MP-0, a foundation
model for materials chemistry that displays an impressive out-of-the-box ability to model a wide variety of
chemical systems. Crucially, we also demostrate that fine-tuning MACE-MP-0 using just a handful of new
configurations leads to quantitatively accurate models, dramatically reducing the cost and barrier to entry
for the modeling of novel chemical systems.
MACE-MP-0 uses the MACE architecture (19), which unified the atomic cluster expansion (ACE) (14,
20–22) and equivariant graph neural networks (16,23). MACE was designed to keep only what appear to
be essential components of the latter (23): the element embedding (12,24) and the equivariant messages
constructed through the symmetric tensor product operation. MACE’s unique innovations are that (i) it uses
high body-order equivariant features in each layer (4-body in the present case), and consequently only two
layers of message passing are sufficient; (25) (ii) it is only mildly nonlinear, as the only nonlinear activations
are in the radial basis and the final readout layer, hence its classification as a graph tensor network, (iii) it uses
tensor decomposition (24) for efficient parameterization of high body-order features. The MACE architecture
3

[page 4]
allows MACE-MP-0 to accurately model its training data while remaining competitively performant with
other graph neural networks, presently allowing simulations of around a thousand atoms for nanoseconds
per day on a GPU.
Despite training MACE-MP-0 on a dataset with a specific materials focus (MPtrj), the most striking
finding is that our model shows remarkable out-of-distribution performance, and leads to stable molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations for arbitrary systems over long timescales showing chemically sensible structures,
reactions and transformations. In the main body of this paper, we showcase the generality of MACE-MP-0
by considering three disparate classes of chemical systems: solid and liquid water, heterogeneous catalysis,
and metal-organic frameworks. In the Supplementary Information, we further demonstrate MACE-MP-0’s
capabilities on an unprecedented range of qualitative and quantitative examples drawn from computational
chemistry and materials science, including running molecular dynamics simulations for a wide variety of
chemistries, predicting phonon spectra, calculating activation energies for point defect and dislocation mo-
tion, simulating solvent mixtures, combusting hydrogen gas, modeling a complete rechargeable battery cell,
and many more.
There are several versions of the MACE-MP-0 model, all trained on the same data set, with minor
variations in the model architecture. Unless otherwise stated, all results in this paper were obtained with
the MACE-MP-0b3 version, and this is emphasized in figures and captions, while we retrain the simpler
“MACE-MP-0” name in the text for readability. All model versions are publicly available.
4

[page 5]
2 Applications
2.1 Water and aqueous systems
Proton transfer in ice and water
0.5 0.0 0.5
Proton transfer coordinate [Å]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Free energy [kcal/mol]
OH
Ice Water
0.5 0.0 0.5
Proton transfer coordinate [Å]
H3O+
Ice Water
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
 [1/cm]
IR spectra
Exp. Water (300K)
Exp. Ice Ih (250K)
Water (330K)
Ice Ih (250K)
2 3 4 5 6
O-O distance [Å]
0
2
4
g(rOO)
Structure and dynamics of water
Exp. Water (300K)
PBE-D3 (330K)
Ice Ih (250K)
Water (330K)
II III IV VI VII VIII IX XI XIII XIV XV XVII
Ice polymorphs
0
50
100
Relative lattice
energy [meV]
Ice polymorphs
PBE-D3
MACE-
MP-0b3+D3
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Simulation length [ns]
0
20
40
60Crystal Size
NaCl dissolution
NNP revPBE-D3
MACE-MP-0b3+D3
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Density [g/cm3]
0
5
10
15
20
25
Distance above surface [Å]
SiO2 dissociative water adsorption
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
O-H distance [Å]
0
5
10
15Free energy [kcal/mol]
Nanoconfined superionic water
PBE-D3 MACE-MP-0b3+D3
δ =r
O*H ′
-r
O ′ H ′
H ′
O*
O ′
δ =r
O ′ H*
-r
O*H*
H*
O*
O ′
a
b
c
d e
f g
Figure 1:Aqueous systems.(a) Oxygen–oxygen radial distribution function for bulk water (experimental
result from Ref. (26)) and ice Ih. (b) Experimental (Ref. (27,28)) and computed infrared spectra of bulk
water and ice Ih. (c) Free energy profiles as a function of the proton transfer barrier for a hydroxide ion and
excess proton in ice Ih at250 K and bulk water at330 K. Snapshots at the top show the simulation cells.
(d) Performance of MACE-MP-0b3 (red squares) on the relative lattice energies of the DMC-ICE13 dataset,
compared to the reference method, PBE-D3 (29) (black circles). (e) Dissolution of a 4 × 4 × 4 unit-cell
NaCl nanocrystal in water at400 K, monitoring the extent of dissolution over the simulation time via the
crystal size. Performance of the MACE-MP-0b3 (red lines) is compared to a neural network potential (30)
trained explicitly to capture NaCl dissolution (black dashed lines). (f) SiO 2/water interface simulation
showing density modulations and dissociative water adsorption, with an inset highlighting the deprotonation
of water as indicated by a shoulder in the water density plot. H3O+ defects in the liquid are highlighted
in green. (g) The free energy profile of the O–H distance in the superionic phase of monolayer water in a
confining potential. The inset shows a snapshot of the monolayer superionic phase with lines indicating the
50 ps-long trajectory of randomly chosen hydrogen atoms with “×” indicating their initial positions.
5

[page 6]
Water is ubiquitous in nature and technology and has long been a major focus of computational work.
Driven by the delicate balance between directional hydrogen bonding and primarily non-directional van der
Waals interactions, aqueous systems remain a challenge for simulations (31). For example, the study of
proton transfer in water, a fundamental process characterized by the continuous breaking and forming of
covalent bonds, has long required usingab initiomolecular dynamics for detailed atomistic insight (32–34).
We demonstrate in this section how MACE-MP-0 describes various aqueous systems.
We start by examining the structure of liquid water and hexagonal ice (ice Ih). The oxygen–oxygen radial
distribution function, depicted in Fig. 1a, shows reasonable agreement with reference simulations. The infra-
red vibrational spectra of both phases, shown in panel Fig. 1b, align well with experimental observations,
albeit with a notable red shift in the stretching vibrations indicating a softer description of the OH bond
as is well-known for PBE-D3 (29,31). In panel Fig. 1d, the relative stabilities of 12 ice polymorphs with
respect to ice Ih, used in a recent benchmark (35), show excellent agreement with respect to PBE-D3 with a
MAE of around5 meV. Proton defects (OH–and H3O+) in ice Ih and liquid water were simulated, revealing
robust descriptions of proton transfer, as shown in Fig. 1c. The proton transfer barrier for hydroxide is
higher than for hydronium in liquid water, consistent with experimental diffusion trends.
Next, we evaluate MACE-MP-0 for describing solid–liquid interfaces. First, we focus on NaCl in water
in two cases: a NaCl(001) interface in contact with water and a small nanocrystal surrounded by water.
Simulations were performed at400 K to promote dissolution, and compared to simulations with a custom-
trainedMLpotentialbased onrevPBE-D3 fromRef. ( 30). As expected, for theflat surfacethe modelpredicts
no dissolution events on the timescale of the simulation (0.5 ns). Meanwhile, for the nanocrystal surrounded
by water, MACE-MP-0 captures a dissolution mechanism resembling that in Ref. (30) as shown in Fig. 1e.
The dissolution proceeds via a crumbling mechanism, where an initial steady loss of ions is followed by the
rapid disintegration of the crystal. As ions dissolve from the crystal, they are hydrated by water. The
dissolution process is stochastic, leading to an intrinsic variation between independent simulations, as shown
by three examples. The final structure of the dissolved ions in water also displays the expected orientation
of the water molecules with respect to the ions.
We then model the SiO2/water interface, Fig. 1f, revealing the expected density modulations in the first
few contact layers. As before, the liquid phase is found to be overstructured, a common characteristic of
the PBE functional (31) used by MPTraj and therefore by MACE-MP-0. SiO2 is known for its dissociative
water adsorption, which we observe in our simulations. Deprotonation of water is evidenced by the shoulder
in the water density plot and can also be seen in the inset of a snapshot of this system in Fig. 1f.
Finally, we investigate nanoconfined water in graphene-like nanocapillaries (36,37), which exhibits dra-
maticallydifferentpropertiesfrombulkwater. MACE-MP-0provedrobustinsimulatingnanoconfinedwater.
Stable simulations were conducted at4 GPaand 600 K, conditions under which a superionic phase with high
ionic conductivity was previously predicted (38) using a custom-trained ML potential. The MACE-MP-0
model accurately captured the dynamical characteristics of this phase, including extensive proton transfer on
the ten pico-seconds timescale, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 1g. Comparing the free energy profile asso-
ciated with the O–H distance [Fig. 1g] against the PBE-D3 reference, MACE-MP-0 shows near quantitative
agreement and an overall very good description of nanoconfined water.
2.2 Catalysis
The study of heterogeneous (44–46) and electrocatalysis (47–49) is another major area where DFT excels.
It provides atomistic insight into the underlying reaction mechanisms and enables the prediction of the
properties of new catalytic materials, (50) including reaction barriers and rates, which are in turn used
to predict turnover frequencies (51). The latter is essential for the computational discovery of new solid
catalysts for overcoming the dependence on rare and toxic elements and improving the efficiency of critical
processes for energy conversion. However, the computational cost of DFT is a serious impediment. Empirical
interatomic potentials are typically inadequate for catalysis applications as they rarely describe chemical
reactions accurately. Machine learning has already had strong impact in computational catalysis (41,52,53),
e.g., enabling fast screening of materials spaces (54–56), and free energy calculations beyond the harmonic
approximation(41,57,58). However, developingsuchaccuratepotentialsfromscratchstillrequiressignificant
human and computational effort. We now test the performance of MACE-MP-0 for different catalysis
applications and summarise the results in Fig. 2.
6

[page 7]
Figure 2:Heterogeneous catalysis.(a) Pourbaix diagrams of CuO bulk systems constructed with MACE-
MP-0b3 (left) and Materials Project reference data (right). (b) MACE-MP-0b3+D3-calculated Pt(111)
surface Pourbaix diagram, in overall good agreement with the literature (39). (c) The relative adsorption
energy scaling relation between O and OH on transition metal surfaces is captured correctly by MACE-
MP-0b3+D3, as is the lack of linear scaling between C and O (40). Metals are colored according to rows
in the Periodic Table as 3d, 4d and 5d. (d) Reaction profile of multistep electrochemical CO oxidation
on Cu. CO–OH coupling and dehydrogenation reactions are characterised in the upper and lower panel,
respectively. EnergyprofilesfromMACE-MP-0b3+D3andPBE+D3nudgedelasticband(NEB)calculations
show significant deviations although the qualitative features agree. Fine-tuning (FT) yields a model that
is in excellent agreement with the reference. (e) MACE-MP-0b3 reaction profile for a key reaction step
(CH2O2 CH2 + O) in the CO2-to-methanol conversion on In2O3 (41) and the profile of an FT model.
(f) Comparison of the atomic environments in the training data (blue) and in the In2O3 NEB images (red) in
the form of a UMAP plot (42,43). Insets show local environments with similar MACE features (inset frames
in blue for training data and in red for NEB configurations), exemplifying which bulk training environments
influence predictions for the out-of-domain catalytic test case.
7

[page 8]
Potential–pH Pourbaix diagrams are central to understanding the aqueous stability of solid materials
in an electrochemical environment (59,60), and thus allow predicting the active phase of an electrocatalyst
undergivenconditions. Withinthecomputationalhydrogenelectrode(CHE)framework( 61), thesediagrams
can be computed without an explicit electrostatic model. Figure 2a–b show the Pourbaix diagrams for bulk
CuO and a Pt(111) surface calculated with MACE-MP-0 using the D3 correction. The Pourbaix diagrams
are constructed via the formalism described in (62,63), where only the energies of the relevant solids are
calculated while corrected experimentally-derived energies are used for the aqueous ions. In both cases, the
MACE-MP-0 results show remarkably good agreement with DFT (39), predicting the correct sequence of
stable phases (with the exception of a very narrow region of Cu2O stability) and corresponding pH and
potential ranges. While this accuracy may be expected for the bulk CuO system that is represented in the
training set, the electrosorption at the Pt(111) surface is also well described despite being out of domain.
In Fig. 2c, adsorption energy scaling relations between atomic and hydrogenated adsorbates on transition-
metal surfaces are shown for MACE-MP-0 and PBE (see SI for more examples). Such scaling relations are
central to understanding the activity of heterogeneous catalysts (64,65). MACE-MP-0 captures these trends
well, and the slopes of the linear fits are in reasonable agreement with DFT (e.g. 0.71 for O vs. OH,
compared to0.64 for PBE). Importantly, the lack of correlation between O and C adsorption energies is also
captured, indicating that the model is not merely sorting metals according to their general reactivity (40,66).
Figure 2d–e show reaction energy profiles for CO oxidation on Cu (67) and a key step in CO2 conversion
to methanol on In2O3 (41,68), respectively. While these are not quantitatively accurate when compared to
DFT, MACE-MP-0b3 nevertheless captures the location and magnitude of the barriers surprisingly well. To
obtain quantitative agreement, MACE-MP-0b3 is fine-tuned with five single-point DFT calculations from
each energy profile. NEB calculations with the fine-tuned (FT) model then yield excellent agreement with the
DFT reference in almost all cases, with the exception of the energy of the final state of CO oxidation, which
is slightly overestimated by the FT model. Here, describing the subtle non-covalent interactions between the
surface and molecular CO2 and H2O would require additional training. Nonetheless, this shows that fine-
tuning with very small datasets is sufficient to obtain quantitatively accurate potentials for heterogeneous
catalysis.
Figure 2f illustrates how MACE-MP-0b3 generalizes to out-of-domain catalysis tasks from bulk training
configurations. To this end, the high-dimensional MACE features are projected to 2D using a Uniform
Manifold Approximation Projection (UMAP) (42), with local atomic environments in the training set shown
in blue and those found in the In2O3 transition path shown in red. Representative environments with similar
features are highlighted, indicating that the internal representation of the atomic environments in the NEB
configurations is similar to the representation of under-coordinated environments and metal–organic systems
in the training set.
While MACE-MP-0b3 is not always quantitatively accurate for the most challenging catalysis applica-
tions, its stability in MD and exploring reactive pathways is remarkable and provides a starting point for
further optimisations. Relevant configurations or phase space regions thus identified may subsequently be
validated either by first-principles calculations or serve to initiate active-learning for refining the model, as
demonstrated forthe NEBcalculations. Even at its currentfoundation level, MACE-MP-0b3 alreadyallows a
statistical sampling far beyond the present DFT-based state of the art which is still largely thermochemistry-
centered, whereas the foundational MACE model will pave the way for true kinetic modeling by explicit
evaluations of reaction profiles and the reactive flux along them.
2.3 Metal–organic frameworks
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of nanoporous materials comprised of metal cations or clusters
connected by organic linkers arranged in a periodic lattice (75). Due to their large surface areas, tunable
building blocks, and permanent porosity, MOFs hold substantial promise for various applications, including
but not limited to catalysis, energy storage, gas adsorption and separations, and optoelectronic devices (75).
We tested our pre-trained model directly against version 14 of the Quantum MOF (QMOF) database, which
contains DFT-computed properties at several levels of theory for 13,912 MOFs and structurally related
coordination polymers (69,70). MACE-MP-0b3 was not trained on any data from the QMOF database,
making this a challenging test of its transferability to largely unseen chemistries.
As shown in Fig. 3a, MACE-MP-0b3 performs well out-of-box in predicting the PBE energies of MOFs,
8

[page 9]
8.0
 7.5
 7.0
 6.5
 6.0
 5.5
 5.0
 4.5
PBE energy [eV/atom]
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
MACE energy [eV/atom]
MAE = 0.040
R2 = 0.985
QMOF (13912 MOF structures)
0.0 0.1 0.2
EMACE EPBE [eV/atom]
10 2
10 1
atom/Å3
100
101
102
bin count
a
b
MACE-MP-0
 DeePMD
 UFF(DDEC)+TraPPE
0.486
0.432
0.378
0.324
0.270
0.216
0.162
0.108
0.054
0.000
free energy [eV] c
Mg
Mn
Fe
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
104e204
 1cf2337
 2d6e25d
 38eac89
 6f636df
 73fcf88
 807cae8
 88883f2
 92d0491
 966fade
 c4528f3
 db02aaa
 f22081b
-0.32
-0.29
-0.25
-0.22
-0.18
-0.14
-0.11
-0.07
-0.04
0.00
free energy [eV]
d
Figure 3:Metal–organic frameworks.(a) Comparison between MACE-MP-0b3 and DFT (PBE) energies
on 13,912 relaxed structures with compatible GGA calculations (i.e. without the Hubbard-U correction) and
pseudopotentials in the QMOF database (69,70). The inset presents the energy error distribution in relation
with the atomic density (number of atoms per volume). The protocol for filtering incompatible calculations
is provided in Appendix A.28. (b) Mg-MOF-74 structure with chemisorbed CO2 optimized with MACE-
MP-0b3. Color key: Mg (orange), O (red), C (brown), H (white). (c) Left: free energy landscape of CO2
in Mg-MOF-74. Middle: free energy landscape from Ref. (71) using a custom-trained DeePMD ML force
field. Right: free energy landscape using the UFF classical force field (72) with DDEC6 charges (73) for the
framework and TraPPE for CO2 (74). (d) Free energy maps of 91 hypothetical MOF-74 analogues, with
the QMOF ID of the parent Mg-containing frameworks indicated at the bottom of each column and the
transition metal to the left of each row.
9

[page 10]
achieving an MAE of0.040 eV/atom (with the full range of energies spanning nearly 4 eV/atom, about100
times larger), despite the pronounced difference between the inorganic crystals of the MPtrj training set and
the MOF structures that make up the QMOF database. This accuracy spans most of the periodic table, after
exclusion of elements with incompatible pseudopotentials and calculation parameters (see Appendix A.28
and Figure S41).
To validate the use of MACE-MP-0b3 for capturing dynamic processes, we investigate CO2 adsorption in
a prototypical MOF known as Mg-MOF-74. The MOF-74 family, including the Mg-containing version, has
been extensively studied for the selective adsorption of CO2 (76–78). Of particular note, the coordinatively
unsaturated metal sites (79) of Mg-MOF-74 enable chemical bonding interactions between the metal and
CO2 adsorbate (76) that cannot be captured from classical force fields alone. We directly compare the
adsorption dynamics against the results presented in Ref. (80), which considered the same system using a
custom-trained ML force field generated using DeePMD-Kit (71) and PBE-D3 calculations in CP2K (3).
MACE-MP-0b3 accurately and efficiently captures the CO2 adsorption process in Mg-MOF-74. As shown
in Fig. 3c, the CO2 adsorbate favorably binds to the Mg center in a tilted configuration that is in agreement
with both experimental neutron diffraction data (77,81) and the previous custom-trained ML model (80).
The mean bond distance between the Mg center and CO2 adsorbate is predicted to be2.27Å from MACE-
MP-0b3 (Figure S41a), in agreement with the experimental value of2.27Å (77) and the value of2.23Å
from the custom ML model in Ref. (80). The mean Mg–O–C bond angle is predicted to be137.3◦ from
MACE-MP-0b3 (Fig. S41a), substantially closer to the experimentally determined bond angle of 131◦ (77)
than the 118.6◦ value from the ML model in Ref. (80). The projected density map for the CO2 adsorption
site (Fig. 3b) is, again, in excellent agreement with prior work (80,81) and shows how the adsorbed CO2
molecules are mobile but largely confined to the vicinity of the Mg binding site due to chemisorption.
To showcase an example of how one might use the foundation model in a high-throughput setting, we
considered 91 hypothetical MOF-74 analogues derived from those in Ref. (82) based on 13 (out of 58)
different frameworks and seven different metal cations (M) that have been used to synthesize M-MOF-
74 (77). Figure 3e shows the resulting free energy maps, comprising over357 ns of simulation altogether,
displaying diverse and dynamic behaviour of the CO2 adsorbate across the range of hypothetical MOF-74
analogues.
Given the nature of our foundation model, we anticipate many additional application areas where MACE-
MP-0(oroneofitsfuturevariants)couldbeofvalueintheMOFfield. BasedontheCO 2adsorptionexample,
we envision applications in capturing dynamic processes, particularly those that cannot be accurately mod-
eled using classical force fields and are prohibitively expensive to carry out withab initioMD given the large
unit-cell size required to describe most MOFs. Foundation models are promising for modeling competitive
multi-component physisorption and chemisorption processes, especially across many families of composition-
ally different MOFs and combinations of gas mixtures, for which training a system-specific, on-the-fly active
learning model would be expensive or even prohibitive. In addition to the compositional diversity relevant
to high-throughput screening, not all MOFs can be described via a static picture and based on an ideal
crystalline structure: in fact, there has been recent interest in liquid and amorphous MOFs (83,84), and
the dynamic behavior of crystalline frameworks (85) — such as in the so-called “flexible” and “breathing”
MOFs — has been leveraged for highly selective separation processes (86). This dynamic behavior cannot
be completely captured from static DFT calculations alone, and accurate and easily accessible interatomic
potentials are expected to accelerate the modeling of spatio-temporal processes in future studies (87).
2.4 A wide range of applications and benchmarks
In the Supplementary Information in 32 subsections, we provide a rather wide ranging set of application
examples to support the claim that the MACE-MP-0 is a robust modeling tool, and when fine-tuned can
reach ab initio accuracy. We also give the results of a comprehensive set of benchmarks, including the
performance on calculating phonon dispersions, bulk and shear moduli of crystals, atomisation energies and
lattice constants of elemental solids, the cohesive energies of the S66 set (88) of molecular dimers and the
X23 set (89) of molecular crystals, the CRBH20 set (90) of reaction barrier heights, and the homonuclear
diatomic binding curves. The full set of heteronuclear diatomic curves is provided in the Supplementary
Materials.
We also give more details on the training protocol, a graphical exploration of the data, including his-
10

[page 11]
MACE-MP-0b3
MACE-MP-0b3-FT
Trained from scratch
Force RMSE (meV/Å)
Supplementary Information subsection task number
Figure 4:Fine-tuning. A comparison of force RMS error on selected applications in the SI for which fine-
tuning was performed. The MACE-MP-0b3 model is shown with pink diamonds and the fine-tuned model
(MACE-MP-0b3-FT) for each application with red squares. For comparison, in each case we also show the
results corresponding to a model trained “from scratch” only to the small amount of fine-tuning data (blue
circles).
tograms of energies, forces, stresses, magnetic moments, and element and composition counts, and a discus-
sion of the quantification of the uncertainty in the model predictions.
3 Fine-tuning
Although the multitude of applications demonstrates that MACE-MP-0 is a robust model, it is also clear
that, in many cases, it is not accurate enough out of the box to rival or replaceab initio calculations. For
a selection of examples, we performed fine-tuning on configurations generated using MACE-MP-0, typically
via molecular dynamics or other downstream tasks appropriate for the application. We used approximately
100 new configurations for each application during fine-tuning. To prevent catastrophic forgetting (91) and
retain the robustness of the foundation model, we introduce a new fine-tuning protocol:multi-head replay
fine-tuning. This approach includes a subset of the foundation model training data in the loss function
while fine-tuning on the new data (see Appendix C.2 for details). We train a separate model for each case
using this multi-head fine-tuning protocol with replay. Figure 4 shows the resulting force errors, which
decrease significantly in every case. For comparison, we also present the force errors of a MACE model
trained just on the small fine-tuning dataset. In almost all cases, the force errors of the model trained from
scratch are significantly worse than those of the fine-tuned model. In each corresponding subsection of the
SI, we demonstrate the performance of the fine-tuned model on application-relevant observables, showing
considerable improvement over the original model in every case.
11

[page 12]
4 Related work: general purpose MLIPs
The development of the MACE-MP-0 models as a foundation models for atomistic materials simulation
follows more than a decade of intense activity and progress in making MLIPs for specific materials. General
purpose MLIPs –i.e., models that aim to target a wide range of chemical systems spanning many possible
combinationofelements–aremuchmorerecent. Here, wesummarisethebriefhistoryofsuchgeneralpurpose
models as well as the culmination of this trend into the creation of true “foundation models”. Within this
commentary, weseektohighlighttheparticularmeritsofMACE-MP-0incomparisontoexistingalternatives.
It is worth noting that the reason we call MACE-MP-0 “foundational” is because of how it can be used, as
already mentioned in the introduction: the model is suitable for many different applications as a tool for
initial exploration, but it likely requires fine-tuning for specific simulation tasks to achieve quantatively
accurate predictions.
A key advance towards making general purpose MLIP models was made by MEGNet, introduced in
2019 (92). This model, which provides property prediction for inorganic crystals, was trained on minimum
energy configurations in the Materials Project (MP) (93) that includes most elements of the periodic table
(89).Subsequently, models that predict atomic forces were also trained on MP-based datasets, including
M3GNet (94) and CHGNet (95), which were trained on snapshots of DFT relaxations of MP structures,
with CHGNet using the MPtrj dataset introduced at the same time (95). The ALIGNN-FF model (96)
was trained on a database of inorganic crystals, JARVIS-DFT (97), which covers 89 elements and uses
the optB88vdW exchange-correlation functional (98). The proprietary GNoME (99) (based on the NequIP
architecture (16)) model also starts from MP, but uses a complex active learning workflow to generate and
train on a dataset of inorganic crystals nearly two orders of magnitude larger than MPtrj. The above models
were created primarily for the purpose of “materials discovery”, i.e. predicting thermodynamic stability of
hypothetical inorganic crystals. In addition, they were capable of molecular dynamics for such crystals, and
indeed both CHGNet and GNoME were used to study alkali metal ion diffusion in battery materials. More
recently, the DPA models (DPA-1 (100) and DPA-2 (101)) were trained to a wide variety of datasets (with
56 and 73 elements, respectively), a combination of some previously available and some released with the
models (altogether 4M configurations). The second paper reports MD results for versions of the baseline
model fine-tuned separately to specific systems (e.g. water, solid-state electrolytes, ferroelectric oxide). To
date, the most general and transferable force field for molecular dynamics is the PFP model (102) (TeaNet
architecture (103)), also proprietary (including its training set that originally covered 45 elements, recently
updated to 72 elements (104), and is significantly larger than MP and also covers molecules and surfaces).
PFP was demonstrated for running simulations on solid-state ionic conductors, and a molecular adsorption
and a heterogeneous catalysis example—systems that formed part of its training data set. There are also
ML force fields specialized for organic molecules (with a much more limited number of elements) such as
the ANI (and later AimNET) series of models (105–107) and the MACE-OFF models (108), as well as for
metal alloys (109). However, there has yet to be a comprehensive demonstration that a single ML potential
can describe solid, liquid, and gaseous systems of materials and molecules across the periodic table and well
beyond the distribution of the underlying training set.1
5 Outlook
The stable MD propagation for a wide range of materials across the periodic table and the DFT-quality
simulation (in some cases after fine-tuning) that we have shown here are landmark achievements for a single
machine-learned interatomic potential. In this sense, we expect that the present study will have implica-
tions for the wider development of the field, beyond any specific model parameterisation. Yet there are a
number of limitations of the current (“b3” and “MPA-0”) versions of the MACE-MP-0 foundation model.
1Since the first preprint version of this manuscript, a number of models have been fitted to the same MPtrj data set and
also to larger extended datasets including the Alexandria (110) and OMat24. (111). Notable models (reported in preprint
form) that showed high in-domain accuracy include SevenNet (112) (based on the NEquIP architecture (16)), GRACE (113),
Orb (114, 115), EquiformerV2 (111), MatterSim (116)and eSEN (117). Of these, the MatterSim models, have been tested
in the molecular dynamics for some materials including polymers and surfaces. The GRACE theoretical framework formally
generalises MACE, but actual released GRACE models remain in close correspondence with the MACE design choices. To
compare with these newer models we also include results for a new model termed MACE-MPA-0 in the SI, which has been
trained on an extended dataset including MPtrj and Alexandria.
12

[page 13]
The exchange–correlation functional used in the MPtrj dataset is PBE (118), which must be augmented
with Hubbard U terms to improve electronic correlations for particular element combinations (introducing
inconsistencies in the PES that must be compensated (6)), and dispersion corrections, such as D3 (29).
Recent developments in DFT are beginning to supersede conventional GGA functionals by achieving im-
proved accuracy at comparable computational cost (119,120), and methods beyond DFT such as hybrid
functionals (121) and the random phase approximation (122) improve upon this even further, but at much
larger computational cost. Refitting or fine-tuning the model to a more modern functional is expected to
increase its predictive power, and will reduce the need for system-dependent corrections such as the use of
Hubbard U terms and dispersion. (Note that the above mentioned inconsistency is not present in the more
recent MATPES dataset, (123) which removes the Hubbard U correction altogether.)
The MACE architecture that we used to fit the data presently does not contain explicit long-range
interactions (beyond the12Å receptive field afforded by two steps of message passing), nor does it take into
account magnetic or spin degrees of freedom. Despite the success in describing many different chemistries
demonstratedherein, therewillbeobservables, particularlyinthecontextofdilutesolutionsandatinterfaces,
that cannot be calculated with a short-range model. There are several approaches to incorporating explicit
electrostatic interactions into atomistic ML models in the literature (124–127), as well as spin degrees of
freedom (95,128,129 ). In the future, foundation models could undoubtedly benefit from such an extension.
Considering the results for the diverse systems shown in the SI, a particular area where the model clearly
needs improvement is describing intermolecular interactions. While the overarching goal of MD stability is
achieved, for many systems there is room for improvement in a quantitative sense, for example in obtaining
more accurate densities of molecular liquids, such as ethanol-water mixtures (section appendix A.17). The
present version of the potential includes a repulsive pair potential (130) that helps describe the repulsive
interaction of atoms at close range, the accuracy of the model (e.g., in predicting the equation of state) at
high pressures is limited due to the absence of data in this regime. This can easily be remedied either by
active learning (116) or a more systematic approach, e.g. replicating part of the MP dataset at lower and
higher densities.
Although we have described an example of a model with wide generalisation, we expect that there will be
considerable improvements possible both in the model architecture and in optimising the way in which data
is assembled, and the model is fine-tuned. (101,131,132 ) It is an open question whether the biggest gains
will be obtained by improving the underlying data (both the amount and the consistency) or by scaling the
size and expressivity of the model. There is good evidence that reaching higher levels of electronic structure
theory (such as improved XC functionals) from a DFT baseline and beyond requires significantly less data
than fitting to DFT itself (106,133,134 ), and we show an example of this in the SI, where we fine-tune the
model to data computed with the r2SCAN functional (135).
Finally, there is the tantalising possibility that with some improvements, it will be possible to make an
ML force field model that achieves quantitative agreement with explicit electronic structure theory across
the full range of chemistry and structure. If this turns out to be true, future foundation models may truly
provide a universal model for carrying out atomistic simulations at scale.
13

[page 14]
6 Methods
MACE All models trained in the paper use the MACE (19) architecture implemented in PyTorch (136)
and employing thee3nn library (137). The MACE training and evaluation codes are distributed via GitHub
under the MIT license, available athttps://github.com/ACEsuit/mace/. The models used in this paper
are available athttps://github.com/ACEsuit/mace-mp/. MACE is an equivariant message-passing graph
tensor network where each layer encodes many-body information of atomic geometry. At each layer, many-
body messages are formed using a linear combination of a tensor product basis (23,24). This is constructed
by taking tensor products of a sum of two-body permutation-invariant polynomials, expanded in a spherical
basis. The final output is the energy contribution of each atom to the total potential energy. For a more
detailed description of the architecture, see Refs. (19) and (138).
Model versions Different model versions have been released based on this work, including the models used
in the first version of the manuscript, now named MACE-MP-0a, and the model used in the present version,
named MACE-MP-0b3. All previous models can be found at https://github.com/ACEsuit/mace-mp/.
Unless otherwise stated in the text, all models used in this paper correspond to MACE-MP-0b3. We use the
label “MACE-MP-0” to refer to this model series generally.
Hyper-parameters The model referred to in this work uses two MACE layers, a spherical expansion of
up to lmax = 3, and 4-body messages in each layer (correlation order 3). The model uses a128-channel
dimension for tensor decomposition. We use a radial cutoff of6Å and expand the interatomic distances
into 10 Bessel functions multiplied by a smooth polynomial cutoff function to construct radial features, in
turn fed into a fully-connected feed-forward neural network with three hidden layers of64 hidden units and
SiLU non-linearities. We fit anL = 1 model, corresponding to a “medium sized” model, as it represents a
good compromise. More efficient models that only pass invariants during the message passing step (L = 0)
or those that pass higher order tensors (L ≥ 2) are straightforward to train, and can form part of the
accuracy/efficiency tradeoff in selecting the optimal model in the future. The irreducible representations of
the messages have alternating parity (ine3nn notation, 128x0e + 128x1o ).
Distance transforms and pair repulsionSmooth behavior of the potential at close approach is essential
for a broadly applicable model. We use a combination of Ziegler–Biersack–Littmark (ZBL) (139) core
potential to the short-range repulsive forces, and distance transformation to smoothly connect this behavior
to equilibrium interactions. The ZBL energy is given by,
EZBL =
X
j
14.3996 · Zi · Zj
rij
· ϕ(rij/a) ·Envelope(rij, rmax, p), (1)
ϕ(r/a) = c0e−3.2(r/a) + c1e−0.9423(r/a) + c2e−0.4028(r/a) + c3e−0.2016(r/a). (2)
where Zu and Zv are the atomic numbers of the interacting atoms, andrij is the interatomic distance between
atoms i and j. The screening lengtha is given bya = 0.529 · aprefactor/(Z aexp
i + Z aexp
j ). The coefficients are
c = {0.1818, 0.5099, 0.2802, 0.02817}. The maximum cutoff radius is defined asrmax = Rcov(Zu) +Rcov(Zv).
The envelope function Envelope(r, rmax, p) is a polynomial cutoff function applied to smooth the potential.
We use the same envelope as the radial basis. To smoothly transition from the the ZBL to the MACE energy,
we use the Agnesi distance transform (140),
yij =

1 + a · (rij/r0)q
1 + (rij/r0)q−p
−1
. (3)
where yij is the transformed distance, and the parametersa, q, andp control the shape of the transformation,
r0 = 1
2(Rcov(Zu) +Rcov(Zv)). We then evaluate the radial basis in this transformed space instead of directly
on the distances.
14

[page 15]
Normalization To ensure internal normalization of the weights and smooth extrapolation to high pressure
systems, we divide the atomic basis in each layer by a learnable quantity called density normalizationei,
ei = 1 +
X
j
tanh
 
SiLU
 X
k
WkBk(rij)
2
(4)
where B denotesasetofBesselbasisand W arelearnableweights. Thepredicteddensitynormalizationvaries
between 1 and the number of neighbors of atomi, depending on the local environment. This normalization
corresponds to a smooth version of the node degree normalization in graph neural networks (141). The node
energy ϵa of atom a is shifted by the isolated atoms energies. Therefore, the prediction of the energy for the
whole structure is constructed as
ˆE =
NX
a=1
"
σ
 KX
k=1
ϵ(k)
a
!
+ µZa
#
where K denotes the total number of message passing layers andϵ(k)
a is the energy of atoma at layer k. µ
and σ are the isolated atomic energies and the mean square of the atomic forces computed on the training
set. The predicted forces and stresses are computed as derivatives of the total energy with respect to the
atomic positions and the strain tensor, respectively.
Training loss The models were trained using a weighted sum of Huber losses of energy, forces, and stress:
L = λE
Nb
NbX
b=1
LHuber
 ˆEb
Na
, Eb
Na
, δE

+ λF
3PNb
b=1 Na
NbX
b=1
NaX
a=1
3X
i=1
L⋆
Huber

− ∂ ˆEb
∂rb,a,i
, Fb,a,i, δF

+ λσ
9Nb
NbX
b=1
3X
i=1
3X
j=1
LHuber
 1
Vb
∂ ˆEb
∂εb,ij
, σb,ij, δσ

,
(5)
where λE, λF , λσ are predetermined weights of energy (E), forces (F), and stress (σ) losses, the symbols
under a hat correspond to predicted values, andNb and Na are the batch size and the number of atoms in
each structure. In the last term involving the stress,εb and σb correspond to the strain and stress tensors,
respectively. We used(λE, λF , λσ) = (1, 10, 10) and Huber deltas ofδE = 0.01, δF = 0.01, δσ = 0.01. We use
a conditional Huber lossL⋆
Huber for forces, where the Huber deltaδF is adaptive to the force magnitude on
each atom. The Huber deltaδF decreases step-wise by a factor from1.0 to 0.1 as the atomic force increases
from 0 to 300 eV/Å. For more details, see the section C.1 in the SI.
Optimization The models are trained with the AMSGrad (142) variant of Adam (143) with default
parameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and ϵ = 10−8. We use a learning rate of 0.001 and a exponential moving
average (EMA) learning scheduler with decaying factor of 0.99999. We employ a gradient clipping of 100.
The training curves for the medium model is presented in Fig. S63 in the SI. Model is trained for 100 epochs
on 40–80 NVIDIA H100 GPUs across10–20 nodes. Training the medium-sized model took approx. 2,600
GPU hours. We find that MACE-MP-0 achieves an energy MAE of18 meV/atom and a force MAE of
39 meV/Å for the medium model. After fine-tuning with higher weights for energies for an additional 50
epochs, the small model is able to achieve an energy MAE of13 meV/atom (see SI C.1).
Performance ThespeedofevaluationoftheMACE-MP-0modeldependsontheatomicdensity, hardware,
floating point precision, size of model,etc. (see section SI A.32 for details), but a rough guide is that on
a single NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80GB of RAM, it can do several nanoseconds per day for 1000 atoms.
When run in parallel using domain decomposition, weak scaling at0.1 ns/day is perfect up to 32,000 atoms
and 64 GPUs for a dense metallic alloy.
15

[page 16]
Training data The MACE-MP-0b3 model was trained on theMPtrj dataset which was compiled orig-
inally for CHGNet (95). This dataset consists of a large number of static calculations and structural op-
timization trajectories from the Materials Project (MP) (93). These include approx. 1.5M configurations
(roughly ten times the approx.150k unique MP structures), mainly small periodic unit cells (90% under70
atoms) describing inorganic crystals with some molecular components. The DFT calculations use the PBE
exchange-correlation functional with HubbardU terms applied to some transition metal oxide systems, but
no additional dispersion correction (144).
Since the potential we fit calculates the energy based only on structural information, ideally we would
like to use consistent electronic calculation parameters and the lowest energy electronic state for each con-
figuration. One significant source of inconsistency is the application of HubbardU, which is used in MP
calculations only when O or F are present together with any of 8 transition metals (Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Mo,
Ni, V, W) (145). The application ofU leads to a shift in energy correlated with the value ofU, i.e. a few
eV, not explicitly accounted for in our fit. Thus, energies from calculations using those8 elements with
and without O or F are inconsistent (in the sense that the energy along a continuous deformation path that
removes the O or F atoms from around these metals would be discontinuous). The pre-trained CHGNet fit
to MPtrj used energies corrected to account for the presence or absence ofU (146). In our fit, this shift only
occurs between structures with different compositions and for any given composition the energies should be
consistent. As a result, we expect configurations that include local regions of these metals with very different
O or F content,e.g. an interface between a metal and an oxide, may be poorly described.
In addition, the current fitting database includes a variety of magnetic orders generated as part of a
systematicsearchforthemagneticgroundstate( 147), chosenfromthefulldatabaseonlybasedoncalculation
type (“GGA Static” and “GGA Structure Optimization”) and energy-difference criteria (95). To quantify the
effect of this additional and unaccounted-for degree of freedom, we classify the magnetic order associated
with each calculation task into one of four categories: 1) no atomic magnetic moment listed, 2) moment
converged to zero on all atoms, 3) converged to ferromagnetic order, and 4) converged to another magnetic
order. Of the approx.150k MP-IDs present, about48k have more than one magnetic order present in the
fitting database. In the vast majority of cases, this includes a calculation where the moments areunknown
(i.e. not recorded) and a single other magnetic order, and we can hope that they are actually consistent.
However, for5186 MP-IDs we find multiple non-trivial magnetic orders. To quantify the effect on the fitting
quantities, we calculate the minimum energies of each magnetic order for each material, and analyze the
range of minima values seen for each material (distribution is plotted in SI Fig. S69). While the vast majority
of materials have negligible variation, there are hundreds with variation>100 meV/atom (i.e. an order of
magnitude larger than the energy error on the validation set), and a few that vary by<0.5 eV/atom.
Long-range dispersion corrections Dispersion interactions, sometimes called van der Waals interac-
tions, are crucial for describing the weak, long-range interactions between electrons. Common approxi-
mations in DFT, such as PBE (118), cannot capture such long-ranged interactions, motivating the use of
additive non-local corrections, such as DFT-D3 (29) or rVV10 (148). Inclusion of a dispersion correction
to DFT is necessary to describe the dynamics of liquid water (149), the geometries and binding energies of
layered solids (150), and stability of metal–organic frameworks (151), among many other examples.
Additive dispersion corrections typically employ a physical model for dispersion interactions with em-
pirical parameters optimized to cut off the correction at interatomic distances where approximate DFT
is reliable. DFT-D3 is an interatomic potential which uses tabulated values of atomic polarizabilities to
describe two-body and, optionally, three-body Axilrod–Teller (152) dispersion interactions. As MACE-
MP-0b3 is trained to PBE energies, forces, and stresses, it inherits PBE’s lack of long-range dispersion
interactions. An optional, additive DFT-D3 dispersion correction can be applied to MACE-MP-0b3. The
PyTorch implementation of DFT-D3 used in this work is described in Ref. (102). The same parameters used
in PBE-D3(BJ), i.e., DFT-D3 with a Becke-Johnson damping function (153), are used in the D3 correction
to MACE-MP-0b3.
16

[page 17]
Author contributions
Model training:YC, PB, IB, CL;Data/Model analysis:PB, YC, JR, NB, RE, MCK, ES, IB;MACE
code: IB, YC, SWN, DPK, PB, WCW, MA, SV, ES, CL;Application examples: WJB (CsPbI3, ap-
pendix A.5); LLS (catalysis: In2O3, section 2.2 and appendix A.24.4); IB (a-C quenches, appendix A.3.1);
ZEM (a-C graphitisation, appendix A.3.2); NK (Si interstitials, appendix A.1); EVU, XRA, NON (aqueous
interfaces, section 2.1 and appendix A.19); YC (molten salts, appendix A.20); CSc, VK, FDP, XRA (water
and ice, section 2.1 and appendix A.16); SPN and AGS (LiNiO2, appendix A.12); SWN (lithiated graphite,
appendix A.11); AME (zeolites appendix A.10); JJ (transition metal dichalcogenides, appendix A.26); JHM
(ethanol/water, appendix A.17, trialanine, appendix A.30); GL, LAMR (a-Si appendix A.2); DK (carborane,
appendix A.25, ammonia-borane, appendix A.23); VC (S polymerisation, appendix A.9); JR, JaG, JoG and
AAN (phonons, appendix B.1); JR, REAG (materials discovery: formation energy, appendix A.29.1); KSJ
(materials discovery: stoichiometric substitutions, appendix A.29.2); ADK (materials discovery: highly-
coordinated structures, appendix A.29.3); ASR, YC and AME (MOFs, section 2.3 and appendix A.28);
MV (solvent mixtures, appendix A.18); DPK, ES, SMB (hydrogen combustion, appendix A.8); NKa, CSu
(HOIPs, appendix A.6); FF, JT (protein dynamics and stability appendix A.7); PG, YW, TDS, JRK and
CO (point and extended defects in BCC metals, appendix A.13); BXS, FB (molecule-surface interactions,
appendix A.31) ;WCW (HEA, appendix A.32); EF, SD (catalysis: linear scaling relationships, section 2.2
and appendix A.24.2); HJ, HHH (catalysis: CO oxidation on Cu, section 2.2 and appendix A.24.3); SH,
SD (catalysis: Pourbaix diagrams, section 2.2 and appendix A.24.1); MCK (benchmarks: bulk and shear
moduli, appendix B.2); FDP (benchmarks: cohesive energies and lattice constants of solids, appendix B.3,
atomization energies appendix B.4, and reaction barrier heights, appendix B.5); TKS (Al2O3, appendix A.14,
diatomics, appendix B.6); JPD (Arsenic random structure search, appendix A.15); IBM (high-pressure hy-
drogen, appendix A.22); IBM, CvdO (electrode-electrolyte interface / battery system, appendix A.27); JK,
VS and KH (CeO2, appendix A.4); FZ (ionic liquids, appendix A.21);Fine-tuning: IB, NB, TW Un-
certainty quantification: FBi, MC, SC, CHH, CO and YW (appendix D);Supervision of research:
AB, ACF, AM, ASR, CH, CO, CPG, CSu, GC, HHH, JaG, JK, JTM, KAP, KH, KR, MA, MC, SD, SMB,
TV, VLD, WH;Drafted manuscript: IB, NB, YC, GC, SD, HHH, MCK, JR, ASR, CSc, JTM;Edited
manuscript: IB, NB, YC, GC, VLD, JaG, REAG, JR, MCK, KAP, ASR, LLS, JTM, AM, CO, AME,
WCW, JLAG;Supervised manuscript writing:NB, GC, VLD, VK, JTM, CSc.
Acknowledgments
Model training made use of resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE
Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under
contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 using awards BES-ERCAP0023528 and BES-ERCAP0022838. Part of
this work was performed using the Cambridge Service for Data-Driven Discovery (CSD3), part of which is
operated by the University of Cambridge Research Computing on behalf of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facil-
ity (www.dirac.ac.uk). The DiRAC component of CSD3 was funded by BEIS capital funding via STFC
capital grants ST/P002307/1 and ST/R002452/1 and STFC operations grant ST/R00689X/1. DiRAC is
part of the National e-Infrastructure. The work of YC, JR, ADK, MCK, MA and KAP was supported by
the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and
Engineering Division, under contract no. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 (Materials Project program KC23MP). We
could not have done this work without the DFT relaxation trajectories freely provided by the Materials
Project and carefully curated into the MPtrj training set by Bowen Deng (95). JR acknowledges support
from the German Academic Scholarship Foundation (Studienstiftung). YC acknowledges financial support
from UC Berkeley and Taiwan-UC Berkel