[page 1]
MatterSim: A Deep Learning Atomistic Model Across
Elements, Temperatures and Pressures
Han Yang 1*†, Chenxi Hu 1†, Yichi Zhou 1†, Xixian Liu 1†, Yu Shi 1†,
Jielan Li 1*†, Guanzhi Li 1†, Zekun Chen 1†, Shuizhou Chen 1†,
Claudio Zeni 1, Matthew Horton 1, Robert Pinsler 1, Andrew Fowler 1,
Daniel Z¨ ugner 1, Tian Xie 1, Jake Smith 1, Lixin Sun 1, Qian Wang 1,
Lingyu Kong 1, Chang Liu 1, Hongxia Hao 1*, Ziheng Lu 1*
1*Microsoft Research AI for Science.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hanyang@microsoft.com; jielanli@microsoft.com;
hongxiahao@microsoft.com; zihenglu@microsoft.com;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Accurate and fast prediction of materials’ properties is central to the digital transformation of
materials design. However, the vast design space and diverse operating conditions pose significant
challenges for accurately modeling arbitrary material candidates and forecasting their properties.
We present MatterSim, a deep learning model actively learned from large-scale first-principles
computations, for efficient atomistic simulations at first-principles level and accurate prediction of
broad material properties across the periodic table, spanning temperatures from 0 to 5000 K and
pressures up to 1000 GPa. Out-of-the-box, the model serves as a machine learning force field, and
shows remarkable capabilities not only in predicting ground-state material structures and ener-
getics, but also in simulating their behavior under realistic temperatures and pressures, signifying
an up to ten-fold enhancement in precision compared to the prior best-in-class. This enables Mat-
terSim to compute materials’ lattice dynamics, mechanical and thermodynamic properties, and
beyond, to an accuracy comparable with first-principles methods. Specifically, MatterSim pre-
dicts Gibbs free energies for a wide range of inorganic solids with near-first-principles accuracy
and achieves a 15 meV /atom resolution for temperatures up to 1000 K compared with experi-
ments. This opens an opportunity to predict experimental phase diagrams of materials at minimal
computational cost. Moreover, MatterSim also serves as a platform for continuous learning and
customization by integrating domain-specific data. The model can be fine-tuned for atomistic
simulations at a desired level of theory or for direct structure-to-property predictions, achieving
high data efficiency with a reduction in data requirements by up to 97%.
1
arXiv:2405.04967v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  10 May 2024

[page 2]
1 Introduction
Material design stands at the heart of technological advancements in nanoelectronics,[1, 2] energy
storage,[3, 4] biomedicine,[5] and environmental sustainability.[6, 7] Conventionally, the development
of new materials has been a slow and expensive process, dominated by experimental trial and error.
Transitioning these efforts in silico offers an immense potential to expedite this process.[8] At the core
of this paradigm shift is the ability to accurately and efficiently predict the properties of arbitrary
materials under practical synthesis and working conditions.
Advances in deep learning have enabled efficient prediction of materials properties in many
domains.[9–12] A few models based on extensive computational databases can make predictions
across many chemical compositions,[13–16] and recent attempts have tried to extend this capability
to the entire periodic table.[11, 17, 17–23] One of the most outstanding examples, universal machine
learning force field (MLFF), has been proposed based on open-source or proprietary crystalline
databases.[11, 17, 19–23] These models mark a significant advancement of machine learning towards
chemical universality for materials modeling. However, the property of a potential candidate material
not only depends on its chemical composition and corresponding near-equilibrium atomic structure,
but also on thermodynamic conditions including temperature and pressure. This results in a require-
ment of high predictive accuracy over an enormous configuration space well beyond the ground states
or local minima of crystal structures typically captured by current databases and models, which
fundamentally limits their applicability for materials design.
To address this challenge, we introduce MatterSim, a deep learning model designed for emulating
materials and predicting their properties under realistic thermodynamic conditions including finite
temperatures and pressures, as illustrated in Fig. 1. MatterSim utilizes deep graph neural networks,
uncertainty-aware sampling and active learning to explore the vast materials space with first-principles
computations as a supervisor for enhanced generalizability.[24] Out-of-the-box, MatterSim operates
as a zero-shot MLFF, delivering both efficient and precise predictions of energies and forces, showcas-
ing proficiency in predicting energetics near ground states and dynamics under realistic conditions,
with a mean absolute error (MAE) of 36 meV/atom (43 meV/atom as chemical accuracy) on MPF-TP
(a dataset covering wide ranges of materials structure sampled under finite temperature between 0-
5000 K and pressures between 0–1000 GPa), marking a ten-fold increase in accuracy compared with
previous efforts.[19–21] Therefore, MatterSim is well-suited for calculating a broad range of proper-
ties, including lattice dynamics, mechanical properties, thermodynamics and more. Remarkably, the
model is capable of predicting temperature- and pressure-dependent free energies of wide ranges of
solid materials comparable with first-principles methods and experimental measurements, thereby
opening an opportunity for fast and accurate prediction of phase diagrams of materials. Furthermore,
2

[page 3]
Materials science tasks
Structure optimization
Phonon prediction
Mechanical property
Phase diagram
Molecular dynamics
Machine learning capability
Zeroshot emulation 
(Machine learning force field)
Uncertainty quantification 
(Active learning)
Model distillation
Data efficient fine-tuning 
(Arbitrary level of theory)
Input Output
Direct property prediction
MatterSim
Candidate materials
Deep graph neural networks
High-pressure
 synthesis
Superconductor
Inorganic 
synthesis
Earth mantle
condition
pressure
Temperature
Fig. 1: MatterSim is a deep learning atomistic model for predicting materials properties
with high predictive accuracy across chemical elements, temperatures and pressures,
enabling a wide range of applicability and functionality.
MatterSim’s extensive coverage of the compositional and configurational space of materials enables
it to effectively describe material features in the latent space and to serve as a pre-trained model for
continuous learning and further customization, with high data efficiency. With active learning and
fine-tuning, the model can be extended to carry out atomistic simulations of highly complex systems
beyond its current data coverage and theory level. For example, to simulate liquid water, only 3% of
the data is needed to customize MatterSim to obtain the results of a specialized model trained from
scratch, and to reproduce the experimental structural and transport properties of water. Additionally,
MatterSim’s highly expressive features enable direct structure-to-property prediction of materials,
which is also known as end-to-end prediction. After being fine-tuned with a limited amount of data,
MatterSim outperforms specialized models trained exclusively with domain specific data on the tasks
related to lattice dynamics, electronic and mechanical properties in Matbench.[25]
3

[page 4]
2 Results
2.1 Learning the materials space under first-principles supervision
MatterSim employs an active learning approach to explore the extensive materials space, integrating
a deep graph neural network, a materials explorer, a first-principles supervisor,[24, 26–28] and an
ensemble uncertainty monitor, see Fig. 2(a). Starting from an initial dataset curated from existing
sources, the first-principles supervisor offers the deep learning model supervision signals relating to
energies, forces, and stresses on the given structures at the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)
Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)[29] level of theory with Hubbard U correction[30] for select materials
as specified by the Materials Project standard settings[31]. This trained model then functions as
an effective surrogate to the first-principles method, guiding the materials explorer to gather more
structures, thereby exploring the most uncertain regions of materials space to enrich the samples for
model training. These sampled structures will also be labeled by the first-principles supervisor to
provide additional training signals to the model following an active learning loop. The MatterSim
model, curated from several such iterations, is capable of learning a wide range of materials space
with minimal data redundancy.
A key feature of MatterSim is the vast coverage of materials space. We note that data in current
databases has significant chemical and/or structural bias, leading to significant under-sampling of
materials space. For example, most open databases are obtained through relaxation of experimental
crystal structures with first-principles calculations.[19, 20, 32–34]. As demonstrated in Fig. 2(c) and
Fig. 2(d), the relaxation trajectory contains highly symmetric structures close to local energy minima
with high structural redundancy. Therefore, models trained on such data are deficient in the general-
izability and predictive power needed for atomistic simulation of materials under realistic conditions
like finite temperatures and pressures. In addition, these databases tend to have a strong bias towards
certain elements, which leads to an under representation of many interatomic interactions.[20] Here
our designed materials explorers featuring a diverse collection of materials, including ground-state
or near-equilibrium structures from public datasets and in-house generated ones by the ground-state
materials explorer, as well as off-equilibrium structures (see Fig. 2(a)) across a wide range of temper-
atures and pressures by the off-equilibrium materials explorer, signifying a critical expansion of the
configurational space. It is worth noting that active learning is adopted in a batched manner in the
sampling process to avoid relabeling structures of high confidence to the model. With such a scheme,
we collected a first-principles labeled dataset with better chemical and structural coverage, with an
analysis in Section S3. As of the date of publication, the training dataset contains ∼17M structures
4

[page 5]
labeled with first-principles computations. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the curated dataset is representa-
tive of materials at temperatures and pressures covering 0–5000 K and 0–1000 GPa. The element pair
distribution (see Fig. S11) also shows significantly better sampled chemical space with a more uni-
form distribution. More importantly, the dataset contains on average 2 to 3-fold more distinct atomic
environments across the entire periodic table compared to previous databases based on DFT relax-
ation of crystal structures, and 10-fold or even higher for certain elements especially for noble gas
elements. More details on this are provided in Section Fig. S13. The coverage of the data generated
in this work has empowered MatterSim to make accurate and robust predictions for a wide range
of applications; in Fig. 2(e), we list the performance of MatterSim on six tasks, including phonon-
related property prediction, materials discovery (MatBench Discovery), and dynamics under realistic
conditions (structure benchmark sets sampled from ab initio molecular dynamics with wide tempera-
ture and pressure ranges). The most noticeable enhancement are observed on the benchmark datasets
MPF-TP and Random-TP (sampled from high temperature and pressure), where MatterSim achieves
up to 10-fold improvement compared to universal force fields trained on relaxation trajectories.
The choice of model architecture is of central importance to the performance of MatterSim. It
needs to be scalable – capable of consuming large amount of data by expanding the model size. It also
needs to be efficient during inference so that the model can tractably be used to carry out complex
simulations for long timescales. Many models have been developed for application as an MLFF as
well as to predict other properties. In this work, we opt to use two primary architectures, M3GNet[19]
and Graphormer[35] as the backbones for MatterSim. M3GNet is an invariant graph neural network
model with high data efficiency, which has been used to train models (and ensembles) with data up
to 3M. For models with larger data sizes, we turn to Graphormer. Graphormer is a transformer-
based model with proven learning capacity and scalability.[35, 36] In particular, we baked in several
additional attributes including invariance to translation and periodic boundary conditions and explicit
equivariant features to better accommodate materials-related tasks, see Section S1 for more details.
Such a model has better accuracy and better generalizability compared with smaller models at the
cost of substantially reduced inference speed and higher GPU memory requirements, see Fig. S5
for more details. Considering that models with different sizes have different accuracy and inference
speeds, the choice for which model to use can be made based on the time or accuracy constraints of
the relevant task. In this work, we use the M3GNet-based model for all zero-shot simulations due to
its fast inference speed, except for the MatBench Discovery task. For MatBench Discovery and end-
to-end property prediction, we turn to a Graphormer-based model, which gives better accuracy. A
brief comparison of model efficiency and accuracy is provided in Section S1.5 of SI.
5

[page 6]
(a)
(b)(c) (d)
(e)
Fig. 2: MatterSim is developed on an enriched materials space. (a)A data explorer employed
in MatterSim for generating datasets covering wide potential energy surface; Histogram of the stress
(GPa) and effective temperature (K) of (b) the generated materials in this work, (c) the MPF2021
dataset and (d) the Alexandria dataset. (e) Comparative performance metrics of MatterSim across
six tasks: energy prediction on MPF-TP and random-TP datasets, phonon properties including max
frequency and density of states (DOS), Bulk Modulus, and inverse F1 score in MatBench-Discovery
leaderboard. Lower scores indicating superior performance for all tasks. Refer to main text and
supplementary information for task details.
2.2 MatterSim as a zero-shot atomistic emulator
MatterSim serves as a universal MLFF to efficiently predict energies, forces, and stresses of struc-
tures consisting of any combinations of elements from the periodic table (currently supports the first
89 elements) under simulation conditions of 0-5000 K and 0-1000 GPa, without additional training
data. Its universality and accuracy is benchmarked on multiple open datasets as well as three newly
created ones with better representation of the model’s capability under finite temperatures and pres-
sures. Detailed description of these datasets are provided in Section S6 of SI. As shown in Table S1,
MatterSim outperforms force fields trained on open relaxation trajectory databases with a substantial
increase in accuracy by an order of magnitude compared to previous best-in-class, which showcases
the model being faithful in reproducing first-principles potential energy surfaces covering wide chemi-
cal, temperature, and pressure spaces. Most significant improvements are observed on theMPF-TP and
6

[page 7]
(b)
(c)
(d)
Ir3B2 (Iba2)Ca2C3 (C2)Pt4P3 (R3)Y2C (P32)
(a)
Fig. 3: MatterSim as a zero-shot emulator empowering materials discovery. (a)and (b) are
the contribution of each dataset to the combined convex hull formed byAlexandria-MP-ICSD dataset
(see text) and RSS-generated materials; (c) Elementwise appearance distribution[37] of the 852 RSS-
generated materials found be to on the combined convex hull formed by the Alexandria-MP-ICSD
and RSS-generated materials. The materials containing H, Si, N, Sb, O, S, Se, Te, F, Cl, Br, I are
removed due to potential issue with how anion corrections are implemented in Materials Project when
applied to hypothetical materials[38]. (d) exhibits examples of materials found to be lower than the
Alexandria-MP-ICSD hull, with the corresponding space group in the parentheses.
Random-TP datasets, which are sampled from high temperature and pressure simulations; see Fig. 2(e)
for more details. This enables MatterSim to carry out wide ranges of zero-shot simulation tasks
including but not limited to materials discovery, phonon prediction, mechanical property prediction,
Gibbs free energy prediction, phase diagram construction, and molecular dynamics simulations.
Materials Discovery. MLFFs combined with high-throughput screening, crystal structure pre-
diction, or generative models, have shown the capability to accelerate materials discovery where the
force field is used as an efficient surrogate to first-principles method to compute energy as a measure
7

[page 8]
of materials’ stability.[11, 39, 40] At the core lies the accuracy in measuring ground-state energies of
materials of wide elemental combinations. MatterSim shows a strong capability in predicting stability
of new materials, with an F1 score of 0.83 and a mean absolute energy error of the formation energy
of 25 meV/atom benchmarked on MatBench Discovery, details to follow in Table S2, marking the
SOTA capability to relax the initial structures as well as to accurately label the energies of the relaxed
ones. To further demonstrate its potential at scale, we carried out an exhaustive search on all binary
chemical systems using random structure search (RSS),[41] and the computational details are listed
in Section S8 of SI. RSS has the advantage of baring a theoretical guarantee of being exhaustive, but
its applicability has been constrained due to the prohibitive computational cost of relaxations with
first-principles methods and the lack of an MLFF that is capable of predicting materials near and
far from their equilibrium positions. (The initial structures of RSS are far from equilibrium.) Using
MatterSim, we carried out materials screening on all 4,005 unary and binary chemical systems of 89
elements with 45 chemical compositions for binary chemical systems, up to 12 atoms in the unit cell.
For each chemical system, we generate 20,000 candidate materials, resulting in about 80 million struc-
tures in total. By taking the most stable three structures from each chemical composition according
to MatterSim’s energy prediction, and using first-principles computations for verification, we identi-
fied 16,399 structures to be on or below the energy convex hull defined by the Alexandria-MP-ICSD
structures[31, 42–44] (See Ref. 39 for more details). Importantly, on the combined energy convex hull
formed by Alexandria-MP-ICSD and the RSS datasets, the current RSS constitutes the largest con-
tribution of 5,213 out of 7,268 materials, representing the best coverage of 71%, compared with any
previous efforts as shown in Fig. 3(a). Among the 5,213 stable structures, 1,974 of them are newly
discovered, i.e., not present in the Alexandria-MP-ICSD dataset (see Fig. 3(b)). Fig. 3(c) presents
the element-wise appearance of the 852 materials out of the 5,213 structures on the combined hull,
excluding materials that would be potentially impacted by anion correction implementation in Mate-
rials Projects. Our findings underscore the vast potential for discovering diverse new materials, even
within binary chemical systems.
Phonons. Phonons are pivotal in solid-state physics and materials science,[45, 46] acting as
key indicators of dynamic stability and the paramount foundation for predicting mechanical proper-
ties and free energies, but it is computationally expensive to compute phonons using first-principles
methods.[47–51] While machine learning can in principle accelerate this process[19, 21], enhanced
quantitative predictive power is needed.[52] MatterSim achieves high accuracy in predicting phonon
spectra of materials thanks to its faithful and robust reproduction of the potential energy surface close
to local minima. Fig. 4(a) shows the benchmark results on the materials from the PhononDB,[53]
using maximum phonon frequency as an indicator, and a good agreement is achieved with a mean
8

[page 9]
absolute error (MAE) of 0.87 THz. An example phonon dispersion of ZnSe is shown in Fig. 4(b). Com-
pared with first-principles references, not only is the highest frequency reproduced but also the entire
spectra. More phonon dispersions of example materials and their comparison with first-principles
calculations can be found in Section S9 in the SI.
Mechanical Properties. Understanding mechanical properties is crucial in materials design and
engineering to ensure safety and reliability, especially when taking into consideration temperature
and pressure dependence. We showcase the capability of MatterSim to predict mechanical properties
by computing the bulk modulus of a wide range of ordered inorganic crystals gathered from previous
studies (see Section S10 for details) and their temperature dependence under quasi-harmonic approx-
imation (QHA) with computational details list in Section S10. Fig. 4(c) shows the parity plot of the
0 K-bulk modulus predicted from MatterSim and their first-principles references. A remarkable agree-
ment is achieved with an MAE of only 2.47 GPa. In addition, as a model that predicts materials under
finite temperature, we also predict the temperature dependence of the bulk modulus of materials. As
an example, Fig. 4(d) exhibits the temperature dependence of the bulk modulus of AlN predicted by
MatterSim, with the MAE being 0 .97 GPa over the temperature range and with a percentage error
less than 5% up to 1000 K compared to first-principles references. A detailed comparison on other
materials are shown in Section S10 of SI. These results demonstrate MatterSim’s robustness and accu-
racy in predicting the effects of materials’ properties under a wide range of temperatures. In addition
to temperature dependence, we demonstrate that MatterSim is capable of predicting the pressure-
dependent behavior in Fig. S20b up to 1000 GPa. Such capability further signifies the importance of
data coverage, especially under realistic temperatures and pressures.
Free Energy and Phase Diagrams. Over the last two decades, high-throughput computations
driven by first-principles methods[31] and more recently by large-scale machine learning[11, 19] have
been proposed in hope to accelerate the discovery of new materials. However, such methods heavily
relied on the energy above hull metric to determine the stability of proposed candidates, suffering
from the zero-Kelvin curse[54] — the stability of materials is measured by their ground-state energies
without considering temperature effect. Formally, the thermodynamic stability of a material is deter-
mined by its Gibbs free energy under synthesizing and operating conditions. While such quantity can
be computed using first-principles methods in principle, the cost to transit from ‘energy above hull’ to
‘free energy above hull’ is prohibitive. We benchmark MatterSim for its efficiency and accuracy on free
energy prediction on wide ranges of ordered inorganic solids by comparing with both first-principles
calculations using the PBE functional,[29] and experimental measurements.[55] As shown in Fig. 4(e)-
(f), and Fig. S21, MatterSim achieves a sub-10 meV /atom error for temperatures up to 1000 K when
compared with QHA computations at PBE level of theory, signifying a near-first-principles predictive
9

[page 10]
(b)
(f)
(a)
(c)
(e)
(d)
Fig. 4: MatterSim as a zero-shot emulator for predicting lattice dynamics and thermody-
namic properties. (a), (c) and (e) are parity plots of maximum phonon frequency, bulk modulus
and computed free energy difference between 0 and 300 K, respectively; (b) is the phonon dispersion
of ZnSe, (d) is the temperature dependent bulk modulus of AlN and (f) is the predicted B1-B2 phase
boundary of MgO with a comparison to first-principles studies and experimental measurements.
power. More importantly, when compared with experimental measurements on over 200 materials
as shown in Fig. S22, it achieves an MAE of 15 meV /atom(see Section S11.1), lower than dedicated
models directly trained on experimental data.[55] With such a result, we demonstrate as a proof-
of-concept construction of temperature- and pressure-dependent phase diagrams using MatterSim.
Under QHA (See Section S10 for details), we computed the phase boundaries (Fig. 4(f)) of MgO
and Si (discussed in Section S11). In Fig. 4(f), MatterSim predicts the transition pressure of MgO
from B1 to B2 at 300 K to be 584 GPa, which is very close the recent experimental measurement
429–562 GPa[56] and a recent first-principles prediction 520 GPa[57]. In addition, Fig. 4(f) plots the
10

[page 11]
B1–B2 boundary over temperatures up to 16 000 K and pressures up to 700 GPa. MatterSim not only
computes phase transition pressures in good agreement with experiments for ambient temperature,
but also predicts the phase stability under extreme temperatures and pressures well — the predicted
phase boundary falls into the shaded region connecting experiments reported in literature and is very
close to the experimentally measured boundary for temperatures higher than 4000 K.[56, 58] Notably,
such a prediction not only requires good description of free energy with the temperature dependence,
but also its pressure dependence, signifying the importance of generalizability hardly achieved by
directly fitting to limited experimental data.[55]
Molecular Dynamics Simulations. MLFFs have shown significant acceleration in molec-
ular dynamics simulations and high accuracy compared with first-principles methods, if trained
properly.[59] The universality and robustness of MLFFs heavily rely on the coverage of underly-
ing training data. A lack of chemical, configurational, or compositional coverage inevitably leads to
erroneous or even diverging simulations.[60] This issue becomes particularly pronounced when the
simulation temperatures and pressures are high. Benefiting from the data collection and training
pipeline, MatterSim serves as a surrogate model to first-principles methods to carry out robust, effi-
cient, and accurate molecular dynamics for complex materials under finite temperature and pressure
conditions. To validate MatterSim’s robustness under arbitrary simulation conditions (especially on
finite temperature and pressure tasks), we randomly selected 118 systems including bulk inorganic
materials, metal organic frameworks, two-dimensional materials, interfaces, molecular crystals, poly-
mers and surfaces, with details of the selected materials discussed in Section S12 of SI. All of these
systems are subject to heating from 0 to 5000 K in a relatively short time frame to benchmark the
emulator’s robustness to deal with both the crystalline and the liquid or disordered structures, as well
as the phase transition between them. A success rate is defined as the ratio of the actual runtime to
the preset total time in MD simulations. As shown in Fig. 5(b), MatterSim achieved more than 90%
success rate for all the material families tested, exhibiting robustness over wide temperature ranges.
In addition, all bulk systems are subject to additional compression from 0 to 1000 GPa (followed by
heating from 300 to 5000 K) to further benchmark MatterSim’s pressure response, see the inset in
Fig. 5(c) for details. As Fig. 5(c) shows, the vast majority of systems have completed the entire simu-
lation process and the average finished rate is above 90% as well. Beyond robustness, MatterSim also
achieves high accuracy. As an indicator, MatterSim has an up-to-10-fold lower prediction error com-
pared with previous universal MLFFs on the Random-TP and MPF-TP datasets that are created under
wide temperature and pressure ranges, see Fig. 2(e) and Table S1 for more details. Interestingly, Mat-
terSim demonstrates good generalizability to material systems that is not trained on. We depicted
two example MD trajectories, including a metal-organic framework (MOF) compound under NPT
11

[page 12]
(b) (c)MOFInterfaceBulkPolymerSurfaceMolecule
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pressure (GPa)
£107
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time (ps)
°1000
°500
0
500
1000
Potential Energy (eV)
0 1 2 3 4
Distance (˚A)
0
5
gMg°Mg(r)
0 ps
200 ps
400 ps
(d)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Temperature (K)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time (ps)
°1100
°1050
°1000
°950
Potential Energy (eV)
0 1 2 3 4 5
Distance (˚A)
0.0
2.5
gAg°Ag(r)
0 ps
200 ps
400 ps
(e)
(a)
2D
Fig. 5: MatterSim as a zero-shot molecular dynamics (MD) engine. (a) Examples materials
selected for running molecular dynamics; (b) the success rate of molecular dynamics with increasing
temperature and pressure for various categories of materials; (c) analysis of the stopping temperature
and pressure of the molecular dynamics trajectories, with the temperature and pressure profile of
the trajectory shown in the inset; (d) the potential energy of a MOF material under increasing
temperature and NVT ensemble, with the inset being the radial distribution function of the Ag-Ag
atoms gAg−Ag(r) at 0, 200 and 400 ps of the trajectory; and(e) the potential energy of a bulk inorganic
material under increasing pressure and NPT ensemble, with the inset being the radial distribution
function of the Mg-Mg atoms gMg−Mg(r) at 0, 200 and 400 ps of the trajectory.
ensemble and a bulk inorganic material under NVT ensemble to show the accuracy of MatterSim in
Fig. 5(c) and Fig. 5(d) – for the six snapshots, MatterSim predicts a mean error of energy lower than
50 meV/atom, within wide temperature and pressure ranges.
12

[page 13]
2.3 MatterSim as an active learner
Uncertainty quantification and continuous learning are critical to the successful application of a
machine learning model to predict material properties or carry out meaningful simulations. This is
especially the case for molecular dynamics because making prediction on out-of-distribution (OOD)
configurations can lead to erroneous energies and forces, which in turn results in unphysical simulation
trajectories or even simulation failure. Considering that the pretrained MatterSim model covers wide
ranges of atomic configurations, the idea is that only a small amount of new data is needed to
supplement the model to capture the OOD configurations. We show that with the help of a model
ensemble, MatterSim provides confidence estimates in simulating any system without performing
actual first-principles computations. More importantly, whenever the pretrained model is deemed
unconfident, MatterSim only requires a small fraction of the trajectory being labeled by first-principles
computations as additional training context to reach the same level of accuracy compared with
training from scratch.
Building on the strengths of MatterSim and its active learning capabilities, we applied it to a few
intricate systems to showcase its efficacy, including molten phosphorus, molten boron, and an ionic
superconductor (lithium dodecahydro-closo-dodecaborate, Li 2B12H12), whose structures are depicted
in Fig. S40 and the inset of Fig. 6(a). Such systems demonstrate complex interatomic interactions
and intrinsically require heavy effort in data generation and model training.[61, 62] In our study,
MatterSim selected the structures for active learning based on an ensemble criterion described in
Section S13 in the SI, and it only requires including a small fraction of the structures in the simulation
trajectory as additional training data to recover a high prediction accuracy. As shown in Fig. 6(a),
the model reproduces similar level of accuracy for Li 2B12H12, while including only 15% of the data if
it were trained from scratch. Similar performance was also observed for phosphorus and boron shown
in Fig. S42 and Fig. S43. In addition, we show in Fig. 6(b) that by incorporating additional first-
principles supervision signal on the data points of high uncertainties in the active learning process,
we notably reduced the maximum error compared to the zero-shot prediction of MatterSim, which
clearly demonstrated the efficacy of MatterSim’s capability as an active learner.
2.4 MatterSim with arbitrary level of theory
The potency of predictions generated by the machine learning emulator is inherently constrained
by the theoretical level of the training data. Here, MatterSim capitalizes on the supervisory signal
derived from GGA-PBE[29] functional (and Hubbard U correction[30] for qualified materials; the
detailed information is listed in Section S5). This underlying constraint imposes a limitation on the
accuracy of MatterSim when applied to a more expansive range of systems and applications. Here
13

[page 14]
100 101 102 103 104
Number of samples
0.1
1
Max Force Error (eV/˚A) Active Learning
Training From Scratch
DFT Error Threshold (0.2 eV/˚A)
0 50 100 150
µ(deg.)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
POOO(µ)·sinµ(deg.°1) MatterSim (ﬁnetune-30)
MatterSim (zero-shot)
MatterSim (scratch-900)
Experiment
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Time (ps)
10°1
100
Max Force Error (eV/˚A) MatterSim (active learning)
MatterSim (zero-shot)
100
Uncertainty of force (eV/˚A)
(b)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
r(˚A)
0
2
4
6gOO(r)
MatterSim (ﬁnetune-30)
MatterSim (zero-shot)
MatterSim (scratch-900)
Experiment
(c) (d)
(a)
Fig. 6: MatterSim’s efficiency for complex simulation tasks using active learning and fine-
tuning. (a) Max force error against first-principles results in the simulation trajectory of Li 2B12H12
from the actively learned model and the model trained from scratch and its crystal structure, with
increasing number of data samples. (b) The inference error and uncertainty of force along the AIMD
trajectory for Li 2B12H12. The red points represent the structures with above-threshold uncertainty
taken for active learning. (c) Oxygen-oxygen radial distribution functions of water obtained from MD
simulations performed by the zero-shot (blue thick dotted dash), scratch-900 (blue thin dotted dash)
and finetune-30 (dark purple solid line) models. Black dots represent experimental references.[63, 64]
(d) Oxygen-oxygen-oxygen-angular distribution functions, POOO(Θ), obtained from MD simulations
performed by the zero-shot (blue thick dotted dash), scratch-900 (blue thin dotted dash) and finetune-
30 (dark purple solid line) models. Black dots symbolize the empirical potential structural refinement
(EPSR) of joint Xray-Neutron measurements for bulk water at 298 K.[65] Further details of each
model can be found in Section S14 in the SI.
as a demonstration, we conjugate MatterSim with the fine-tuning technique to recover the structural
and dynamical property of liquid water at the rev-PBE0-D3 level of theory and more remarkably
show its high data efficiency. Details of the fine-tuning setup can be found in Section S14.
When simulated with MatterSim in the zero-shot mode at PBE level of theory, water displays
an overstructured feature demonstrated by both the radial distribution function including gOO(r),
gOH(r), gHH(r) (see Fig. 6(c) and Fig. S46), and angular distribution function of the oxygen-
oxygen-oxygen triplets (see Fig. 6(d)) in contrast to experimental measurements. Such overstructured
behavior for water systems has been reported in literature, indicating the deficiency of the PBE
14

[page 15]
functional in correctly simulating water properties.[63, 64, 66] However, with only 30 configura-
tions sampled from an ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) trajectory with rev-PBE0-D3 level of
theory[67, 68], MatterSim can be efficiently fine-tuned and the resultant model (indicated as finetune-
30 model) reaches the same performance as the model trained from scratch with all 900 configurations
from the AIMD trajectory (denote as scratch-900) for water structural properties (see Fig. 6(c) and
Fig. 6(d)). In addition to structural properties of liquid water, we found that the dynamical proper-
ties, here exemplified by the self diffusion coefficient D, can also be greatly improved. The finetune-30
model predicts D=1.862 ×10−5 cm2/s for liquid water, with an error below 20% w.r.t. the experimen-
tal measurements (2.3–2.4 × 10−5 cm2/s)[69]. The detailed discussion of D prediction can be found in
Section S14. Therefore, by finetuning MatterSim, we were able to obtain the similar accuracy of the
scratch-900 model on this task while using only 1/30 of the training data, which clearly underscores
the effectiveness of supervised pretraining on large-scale high-fidelity first-principles data with wide
coverage.
2.5 MatterSim as a direct property predictor
Direct prediction of materials’ properties from their structures is critical to large-scale virtual screen-
ing due to its low computational cost when compared to first-principles methods. This becomes
particularly noticeable when it comes to properties that are computationally intractable to calculate
or experimentally challenging to measure. Machine learning models are promising in this area due to
their capability of capturing non-linear mappings in high dimensional spaces. However, the prediction
error is typically too large to be of practical use due to the lack of data in specific domains. Matter-
Sim adopts an architecture with high transferability (graphormer) and is pretrained on high-quality
first-principles data with a wide coverage. Such data contains the rich dynamics of off-equilibrium
systems, presenting a wealth of complex information for deep learning models to learn from. This pre-
training enables the model to extract expressive features of materials to accommodate domain-specific
property data, facilitating the application to a wide range of downstream tasks beyond atomistic
simulations.
MatterSim’s capability to directly predict materials properties from structures is benchmarked on
a few regression tasks from MatBench,[25] including prediction of computed band gaps, shear moduli,
dielectric constants, max phonon frequency of bulk crystalline materials, and the exfoliation energies
of two-dimensional materials. Detailed training scheme is provided in Section S15 of SI. As shown in
Table 1, leveraging the expressive features extracted from the vast materials data, the model is able to
learn with minimal number of data points and reaches the highest accuracy in predicting all of these
properties. Interestingly, the improvement in predictive power is regardless of the model architecture
15

[page 16]
when the model is pre-trained on the large-scale materials database presented in this work, as shown
in Table S5. This signifies the importance of data coverage in extraction of representative materials
features when training deep learning models for robust domain-specific property predictions.
Table 1: MatterSim as a direct property predictor. The perfor-
mance of MatterSim’s performance of the predictions of the properties
in MatBench leaderboard[25] with a comparison with previous models
trained exclusively with domain specific data.
Property Specialized model Training from scratch MatterSim
MP Gap (eV) 0.1559[70] 0.3031 0.1290
log GVRH (GPa) 0.0670[70] 0.0895 0.0608
log KVRH (GPa) 0.0491[70] 0.0687 0.0488
Dielectric (unitless) 0.2711[71] 0.3823 0.2516
Phonons (cm −1) 28.7606[17] 65.8220 26.0220
jdft2d (meV /atom) 33.1918[71] 47.8040 32.7620
3 Discussion
The accurate prediction of material properties and the simulation of their behaviors without
constraints on chemical elements, compositions and configurations are crucial to the digital trans-
formation of materials design. While deep learning has already shown promise in making such
predictions, their practical use is still constrained due to the limited generalizability across the vast
materials space. This challenge is particularly pronounced when factoring in temperature and pres-
sure, as the configurational space becomes exceedingly large. MatterSim addresses this by combining
deep graph neural networks, active learning, and large-scale first-principles computations. The model
achieves up to 10-fold increase compared with previous best-in-class, in the prediction accuracy of
energies, forces, and stresses for off-equilibrium material structures sampled from an extensive chem-
ical space under finite temperature and pressure, benchmarked against first-principles computations.
This enables robust and accurate zero-shot emulation of materials’ ground-state energetics, as well
as their dynamical behaviors under arbitrary temperatures and pressures. Remarkably, the free ener-
gies computed using the model agree well with experimental results; this opens the possibility to
efficiently predict experimental phase diagrams of candidate materials.
More importantly, MatterSim provides a platform for adaptive learning and customization based
on the specific materials design request. Starting from the model pretrained on diverse first-principles
results, only a small amount of new data needs to be brought to the model to refine the pretrained
potential energy surface, thanks to the good coverage of the initial dataset. In addition, the level
of theory of the emulator can then be customized by incorporating a small amount of expensive
data with beyond the PBE level of theory when necessary. For example, MatterSim allows fine-
tuning to achieve the hybrid functional level of theory with only 3% of the data needed to train
16

[page 17]
from scratch. Such two-step adaptivity, i.e., fine-griding the sampling, and fine-tuning the level of
theory, enables extreme data efficiency thanks to the pretrained model. Finally, the model also allows
direct connection with real-world experiments without complex ground-up simulations by building
end-to-end property predictors, thanks to the expressive feature extracted from the pretrained model.
Despite these advancements, MatterSim could be improved in several areas. From the perspective
of model development, it currently utilizes a semi-local description of atomic interactions, where
long-range interactions majorly leverages message passing or updates on attention weights through
graph nodes. Even though this model demonstrates superior performance compared to models that
rely solely on local environments,[19, 72], it doesn’t perform effectively in scenarios where long-range
interactions dominate the properties, such as polymeric and heterogeneous systems[73]. As for data
coverage, the current model is trained only on homogeneous bulk systems, without explicit inclusion
of surface and interface data that are crucial for applications such as catalysis. Additionally, the model
currently only naively supports inferences with DFT-PBE level of theory, limiting its use for systems
involving complex interactions, such as polymers and organic liquids. Inclusion of additional data
with different theory levels by multi-task pretraining could aid in this respect. Further improvement
on data efficiency and the model’s prediction accuracy is possible with semi-supervised pretraining.
Currently, the model only supports the native prediction of energy, forces, and stresses. Including
more data modalities, such as charge, spin, magnetic moments, and even more complex electronic
structure features, could further enhance the model’s accuracy and applicability.
Acknowledgements
We thank Chris Bishop, Tie-Yan Liu, Haiguang Liu, Tao Qin, Bin Shao, Jia Zhang, and Karin Strauss
for their invaluable discussions and expert input which helped to shape this work. We also recog-
nize the valuable input from Chi Chen which helped training of the M3GNet-based model. Special
thanks are due to Prof. Davide Donadio for his comments concerning the application of MatterSim.
Our manuscript has been enhanced by the thorough reviews and constructive feedback from Bichlien
Nguyen, Yu Xie and Jonas K¨ ohler. We appreciate Ryota Tomioka for the implementation of DFT
computation pipelines, and Deniz Gunceler and Maik Riechert for their support with our computa-
tional infrastructure. Shoko Ueda and Peggy Dai have been instrumental in managing the project,
and we are indebted to Lina Lu and Yang Ou for their artistic contributions that have vividly brought
our work to life. Finally, we extend our gratitude to the entire Microsoft Research AI for Science team
for the enriching daily discussions and collective wisdom that have been integral to our progress. HY
17

[page 18]
extends a personal note of gratitude to Zifan Ye and Cunzhi Zhang for their feedback on water sim-
ulation and free energy prediction. ZL wishes to express gratitude to Pascal Salzbrenner and Prof.
Chris Pickard for discussions on crystal structures under high pressure.
Contributions
HY, YZ, JL, HH, and ZL conceived the study, HY, CH, YZ, XL, YS, JL, GL, ZC, SC, CL, HH, ZL
implemented the methods, HY, CH, YZ, XL, YS, JL, GL, ZC, SC, CZ, HH, ZL performed experiments,
CZ, MH, RP, AF, DZ, TX, JS, LS helped with the implementation of the methods and all authors
wrote this manuscript. ZL led the research.
18

[page 19]
Supplementary Information
Han Yang1*†, Chenxi Hu 1†, Yichi Zhou1†, Xixian Liu 1†, Yu Shi1†,
Jielan Li1*†, Guanzhi Li 1†, Zekun Chen 1†, Shuizhou Chen1†, Claudio Zeni 1,
Matthew Horton1, Robert Pinsler 1, Andrew Fowler1, Daniel Z¨ ugner1,
Tian Xie1, Jake Smith1, Lixin Sun 1, Qian Wang1, Lingyu Kong 1,
Chang Liu1, Hongxia Hao 1*, Ziheng Lu 1*
1Microsoft Research AI for Science
*Corresponding author: hanyang@microsoft.com; jielanli@microsoft.com;
hongxiahao@microsoft.com; zihenglu@microsoft.com
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
19

[page 20]
M3GNet input features
Graphormerinput features
Materials structures(𝑍,𝑟⃗,𝐿) latticeelementscoordinates
Materials graph𝐺=(𝑍,𝑉,𝑅,[𝐿,𝑆])
…
coordinates…elementslattice
lattice
elementscoordinates•Edge creation (cutoff)•Relative distance•Cartesian coordinate•Compute 3-body term•⋯
𝑟⃗!"
Fig. S1: MatterSim leverages materials graphs built upon point clouds to represent atomic interac-
tions and geometric features in Euclidean space.
S1 Model architecture and training details
S1.1 Materials Graphs
The input data for the MatterSim model are constructed from material graphs built upon the under-
lying point clouds in the three-dimensional Euclidean space with periodic boundary conditions. Each
point represents an atom with an associated element from the periodic table. We define a materials
graph G = (Z, V , R, [L, S]) (see Fig. S1) with the following components: Z denotes the atomic num-
ber zi and additional features. The geometric features are encapsulated by V and atomic coordinates
R, with each atomic position r in Euclidean space R3. V represents the relative vectors, such as the
bond information between two atoms. S and L are additional optional information, where S is the
global scalar state information, such as temperature, pressure, and other conditions, and L is the 3×3
lattice matrix in crystals. Within material graphs, nodes correspond to individual atoms and edges
are formed based on a predefined rule. Here, a radial cutoff distance rc is used to construct edges. For
any two atoms ri and rj, there exists an edge if the Euclidean distance between them is less than or
equal to ≤ rc. It should be noted that if the coordinates are fractional, we scale them to Cartesian
coordinates. As a form of geometric graph, materials graphs exhibit roto-translational symmetry in
Euclidean space; specifically, MatterSim maintains roto-translational invariance for scalar properties,
such as total energy of materials, and equivariance for vectorial properties like forces. Given a mate-
rial graph, MatterSim adapts different input representations and crystalline features compatible with
the underlying architectures, M3GNet and Graphormer, which will be discussed in more details in
the following sections.
20

[page 21]
S1.2 M3GNet
M3GNet is a graph neural network that explicitly incorporates two- and three-body interactions,[19]
enabling high-accuracy predictions of material properties. This architecture is summarized briefly
below; for further information, we refer readers to the original M3GNet publication[19]. The major
innovation of M3GNet relies on incorporation of three-body interaction into its message-passing
framework, thereby enriching the updated atomic and bond features with three-body information.
This is achieved through the following formulation:
˜eij =
X
k
jl

zln
∥rik∥
rc

Y 0
l (θjik) ⊙ ξ(W vvk + bv)fc(∥rij∥)fc(∥rik∥),
e′
ij = eij + g( ˜W 2˜eij + ˜b2) ⊙ ξ( ˜W 1˜eij + ˜b1),
(1)
where eij is the input edge feature on the bond connecting atoms i and j, e′
ij is the edge update
message containing three-body information, and xi is the feature of atom i. Here, rij represents
the relative positions of atoms i, j; θjik represents the angle between bonds eij and eik; ˜W and
˜b are learnable parameters of the neural network,; jl is the spherical Bessel function with roots zln,
Y 0
l is the spherical harmonics function with m = 0 and rc is the cutoff radius. In addition, fc(r) =
1−6(r/rc)5 +15(r/rc)4 −10(r/rc)3 is a smooth cutoff function, ξ(·) is the sigmoid activation function,
g(x) = xξ(x), and ⊙ represents the element-wise product. It is worth noting that edge feature ˜eij is a
vector of nmaxlmax elements, with n = 0, · · · , nmax − 1 and l = 0, · · · , lmax − 1, and nmax and lmax are
user-defined model hyperparameters. The edge update message e′
ij are then passed to several graph
convolution steps to update both the atom and bond information xi and eij.
In M3GNet, message passing described above are conducted multiple times, and the resulting
atom and bond features vi and eij are passed to a gated multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to obtain the
prediction of energies E. Forces and stresses are predicted by taking gradient of energy with respect
to atomic positions f = −∂E/∂ r and lattice strain σ = V −1∂E/∂ ε via auto-differentiation, where r
are the atomic positions, V is the lattice volume and ε are lattice strains. In this work, we used a re-
implemented version of M3GNet with PyTorch[74] based on original TensorFlow implementation. We
note that during the development of MatterSim, another PyTorch version of the M3GNet emerged
in the MatGL library.[75]
S1.3 Graphormer
In this section, we provide a short introduction to the design and implementation of Graphormer,
with a focus on the modification made to the original architecture for better adaptation to materials
21

[page 22]
Fig. S2: The overview of the Graphormer model.
structures. Graphormer model consists of two major parts: the structural encoder and property
decoder, as illustrated in Fig. S2.
Structural Encoder. The structural encoder is depicted in the left panel of Fig. S3. Here, we
provide a concise overview of the encoder’s components, which facilitate the mapping of atomic species
Zi and positions ri into an embedding feature xi. Similar to existing studies, the embedding features
are initialized with an embedding function, x0
i = Embedding(Zi).
Before going through the attention layer to learn the interaction among atoms, we first model
the spatial relationships between atoms to obtain an attention bias, which will be added to the later
self-attention layer. With rij = ri − rj being the relative positions between atoms i and j, and ˜Φ(·)
being the Gaussian basis kernel function, the attention bias writes
bij = Linear(˜Φ(∥rij∥)). (2)
Then, Graphormer captures the significance of different atoms through centrality encoding by
aggregating the spatial encodings and passing them to a linear layer
b′
i =
X
j∈N(i)
Linear

mij · ˜Φ(∥rij∥)

, (3)
where N (i) is the neighbor list of the i-th atom within a predefined cutoff radius rc, and the local
mask is given by mij = 1 − 6 (∥rij∥/rc)5 + 15 (∥rij∥/rc)4 − 10 (∥rij∥/rc)3 for two atoms i and j. The
centrality encoding is used to update the initial embeding x′0
i = x0
i + b′
i, which will be passed to the
attention module.
22

[page 23]
In the multi-head self-attention module of the h-th layer, Q, K, and V are obtained through
linear mappings from the features xh
i and the features are updated as follows
xh+1
i =
X
j
Softmax


 
QK T
√
d
!
i,j
+ bij

 · mij · V j. (4)
Here d is the hidden dimension and
√
d is used to normalize the product. It should be noted that
K and V for the expanded atoms are directly copied from the initial atoms to ensure the same
representation is shared between an atom within the unit cell and its images outside the unit cell.
To account for the periodic boundary conditions (PBC) inherent in crystal structures, we have
adapted the original Graphormer by incorporating the multi-graph construction introduced in Ref. 10.
This approach enables us to represent atoms within the unit cell as a series of periodic graphs. In
these graphs, image atoms from neighboring lattices are included up to a pre-specified cutoff distance.
Similar to exisiting studies, the interaction of information between different atoms is influenced by a
smooth cutoff function, which is based on the interatomic distance and a predefined cutoff threshold,
allowing us to smoothly decrease the influence of long-distance atomic pairs.
Property Decoder For the Decoder part of Graphormer (see Fig. S3), we adopted the
GeoMFormer[76] module, which uses Transformer modules accommodated for SO(3)-equivariant
vectors.[77] It consists of two separate streams to maintain and learn invariant and equivariant rep-
resentations. Meanwhile, it also includes a cross-attention module that connects the two streams,
enabling information fusion between the two steams and enhancing geometric modeling in each
stream.
To accommodate periodic boundary condition in the decoder, we made the following modifications.
In the initialization part, we no longer use the original vector e0
i = ri/∥ri∥˜Φ(∥ri∥), as it does not
maintain invariance to translation in periodic systems. Instead, we adopt the following initialization:
e0
i =
X
j
mij · rij
∥rij∥
˜Φ(∥rij∥), (5)
Furthermore, we adopted the multi-graph technique similar to that in the structural encoder for the
atoms in the unit cell. Finally, for the output features eN2
i of the N2-th layer, a linear layer is used
to obtain the force:
f i = Linear(
eN2
i
) (6)
23

[page 24]
Fig. S3: The structural encoder and property decoder architecture of the Graphormer model.
The stress prediction was not supported in the original implementation of Graphormer. To enable
the model to predict stress, we designed a new stress head to evaluate stress as follows:
σ =
X
ij
wij
Li
∥Li∥ ⊗ Lj
∥Lj∥ , (7)
where L represents lattice vectors. Here, wij is derived from the features from the decoder followed
by the transformations defined in Fig. S4.
S1.4 Training details
For the training of the M3GNet, we referred to the training setups in the original implementation.[19].
To be specific, the loss function
L = l(e, eDFT) + ωf l(f , fDFT) + ωσl(σ, σDFT) (8)
was used, where l(·, ·) is the Huber loss function, e is the energy per atom, f is the force vector on each
atom, σ is the stress, and ωf and ωσ are the weights of forces and stress, respectively. For the models
used in this work, ωf = 1 and ωσ = 0.1 are used. The initial learning rate was set to be 0.001 for
the Adam optimizer which decays in a cosine manner to 1% to the original values in 100 epochs, and
the training process stops after running for 200 epochs with a batch size of 128 on 8 NVIDIA A100
GPUs. As the training data size increases up to 3M, the the total number of parameters in M3GNet
24

[page 25]
Fig. S4: Illustration of the newly designed stress head for the Graphormer model, utilizing a sym-
metrized weight matrix wij and normalized lattice vector outer products to predict the stress tensor
σ.
increase accordingly from 880K to 4.5M. Without modifying model architecture and training scheme,
further increase of model parameters led to instability under current settings.
For the training of Graphormer, we have configured the structural encoder with 24 attention layers
and the property decoder with 10 layers of GeoMFormer (2 layers in stress head). All attention heads
are set to 32, and the dimension of hidden layers and feed-forward layers is set to 768. The number
of Gaussian basis kernels is set to 128. In the structural encoder, all dropout rates are set to 0.0,
while in the property decoder, the activation dropout is set at 0.1, with all other dropout rates at
0.0. The cutoff for expansion is set to 20 ˚A, the smooth function cutoff is set to 5 ˚A, the maximum
number of expanded atoms is capped at 256, and the offsets for expansion range from -5 to 5 in each
direction. We use AdamW[78] as the optimizer with the hyper-parameter ϵ set to 1e-8, and β1 and
β2 set to 0.9 and 0.999, respectively. The peak learning rate is set to 2e-4, and weight decay is set to
0.0. The model is trained for a total of 1,562,500 steps with a warm-up period of 93,750 steps. After
the warm-up, the learning rate linearly decreases to 0. The batch size for training is set to 256, and
all labels use the mean absolute error (MAE) as the loss function. The energy loss factor, force loss
factor, and stress loss factor are all set to 1.0. The model training is conducted on 64 NVIDIA A100
GPUs. The total parameters of Graphormer is 182M. In the first round of training, only energies and
25

[page 26]
Fig. S5: Model Inference Speed and GPU Memory Usage
forces are trained. After training is complete, the relevant parameters are frozen, and the stress head
is further trained.
S1.5 Model comparison
Graphormer offers a higher degree of model complexity and the potential for increased predictive
accuracy with its larger model parameters to consume the large training dataset. However, this
architectural design inherently leads to slower computational speed compared to M3GNet, especially
when automatic differentiation is employed to predict forces and stresses. Furthermore, the mem-
ory demands of Graphormer are significantly higher. This means that for larger atomic systems,
Graphormer’s need for GPU memory often reaches the upper limit of what is available even on
high-end GPUs such as the A100. On the other hand, M3GNet serves as a more resource efficient
alternative, especially in environments with constrained GPU resources. Its computational frame-
work is optimized for speed, making it a more practical choice for processing a majority of the tasks
encountered in our research. M3GNet’s design balances performance and resource utilization, allow-
ing for the analysis of large datasets and complex systems without the memory limitations faced by
Graphormer.
We further demonstrate the different level of needs of computing resources, we benchmarked the
performance of M3GNet and Graphormer on a set of materials with different number of atoms in the
unit cell in Fig. S5. For example, for a material with 100 atoms, Graphormer requires around 10-fold
more GPU memories compared to our implementation of M3GNet. The accuracy of the models based
on M3GNet and Graphormer is discussed in Section S6 and shown in Fig. S6.
26

[page 27]
S2 Materials explorer
MatterSim’s predictive capabilities are underpinned by a two-part materials structure explorer, as
shown in Fig. 2(a), that enhances the training datasets through both equilibrium and off-equilibrium
structural data.
The ground-state explorer focuses on materials at or near atomistic equilibrium positions. It
primarily utilizes an uncertainty-based method with ensemble models to selectively incorporate data
from both public repositories and internally generated datasets into the database. This approach
ensures the inclusion of the most informative structures for mod