[page 1]
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
PET-MAD as a lightweight universal
interatomic potential for advanced materials
modeling
Arslan Mazitov 1,2 , Filippo Bigi1,2, Matthias Kellner1, Paolo Pegolo 1,
Davide Tisi 1, Guillaume Fraux1,S e r g e yP o z d n y a k o v1, Philip Loche 1 &
Michele Ceriotti 1
Machine-learning interatomic potentials have greatly extended the reach of
atomic-scale simulations, offering the accuracy of ﬁrst-principles calculations
at a fraction of the cost. Leveraging large quantum mechanical databases and
expressive architectures, recent universal models deliver qualitative accuracy
across the periodic table but are often biased toward low-energy conﬁgura-
tions. We introduce PET-MAD, a generally applicable interatomic potential
trained on a dataset combining stable inorganic and organic solids, system-
atically modiﬁed to enhance atomic diversity. Using a moderate but thor-
oughly consistent level of electronic-structure theory, we assess PET-MAD’s
accuracy on established benchmarks andadvanced simulations of six mate-
rials. Despite the small training set and lightweight architecture, PET-MAD is
competitive with the state-of-the-art machine-learned interatomic potentials
for inorganic solids, while also being reliable for molecules, organic materials,
and surfaces. It is stable and fast, enabling the near-quantitative study of
thermal and quantum mechanical ﬂuctuations, functional properties, and
phase transitions out of the box. It can be efﬁciently ﬁne-tuned to deliver full
quantum mechanical accuracy with a minimal number of targeted
calculations.
Efﬁcient methods for solving the electronic structure problem for
molecules and materials have made it possible to predict their struc-
ture, stability, and properties from ﬁrst principles. However, the
associated computational cost and poor scaling with system size
severely limit the complexity, time, and length scale accessible to
simulations. Machine-learning (ML) models that aim to replace ﬁrst-
principles methods to evaluate energy and forces—so-called machine-
learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) —a d d r e s st h i sl i m i t a t i o nb y
training on a set of reference quantum mechanical calculations, and
then making accurate yet inexpensive ML predictions, for both
materials
1–3 and (bio)molecules4–7.
For almost two decades, this scheme has been used successfully
to study a large number of chemical systems for whichﬁrst-principles
calculations are too expensive, and empirical forceﬁelds are either not
available or not suf ﬁciently accurate8–10. Nonetheless, the aforemen-
tioned approach typically implies parameterizing a speciﬁcM L I Pf o r
every new system, which requires a considerable number of ab initio
calculations, as well as substantial human effort and expertise inﬁtting
the potential. In contrast to this family of single-purpose potentials,
recent years have seen the development of several general-purpose, or
universal models
11–13, which aim to be applicable to a large range of
distinct chemical systems, either out of the box or after minimal ﬁne-
Received: 4 April 2025
Accepted: 17 October 2025
Check for updates
1Laboratory of Computational Science and Modeling, Institut des Matériaux, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.2These
authors contributed equally: Arslan Mazitov, Filippo Bigi. e-mail: arslan.mazitov@epﬂ.ch; michele.ceriotti@epﬂ.ch
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

[page 2]
tuning. These models provide a qualitative description of the atomic-
scale interactions across the periodic table, although their level of
accuracy for a speci ﬁc application depends on how closely the pro-
blem of interest aligns with the considerations underlying the con-
struction of the reference dataset. For instance, many existing datasets
are built to represent a collection of stable materials, and to support
the search for new materials with optimal properties
14–17.T oc o m p l i -
cate things, the accuracy of general-purpose potentials is often
assessed using inconsistent levels of ab initio theory, making it difﬁcult
to isolate the shortcomings of the model from the discrepancy in the
electronic-structure reference. In this work, we use the Massive Ato-
mistic Diversity (MAD) dataset, which incorporates a high degree of
chemical and structural diversity while employing highly converged,
internally consistent reference calculations. This allows for a quanti-
tative assessment of the performance of ﬁtted models across the
periodic table, since MAD’s ab initio settings are broadly applicable to
most chemical systems, although the comparatively simple exchange-
correlation functional we use may not always be equally accurate.
Energies and forces are ﬁtted using a Point Edge Transformer (PET)
graph neural network
18, resulting in a general-purpose MLIP, which we
name PET-MAD. We evaluate the accuracy of the resulting model on a
wide range of public datasets, ensuring consistency in the electronic-
structure settings, and showing that PET-MAD achieves competitive
performance on several external benchmarks despite being trained on
2-3 orders of magnitude fewer structures. We then critically assess the
performance of PET-MAD in highly non-trivial atomistic simulations,
including accelerated statistical sampling, quantum nuclear ﬂuctua-
tions, and predicting functional properties. We focus on six examples,
motivated by their scientiﬁc interest, diversity in material classes and
physical effects being probed, as well as the fact that each has pre-
viously been studied using ad hoc MLIPs —namely, lithium thiopho-
sphate, gallium arsenide, a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy alloy, liquid
water, succinic acid, and barium titanate. For each example, we
quantitatively assess the accuracy of PET-MAD by comparing it against
both a bespoke model trained with compatible energetics, which
provides an extremely close match to the electronic-structure refer-
e n c e ,a sw e l la saﬁne-tuned model that enables PET-MAD to achieve
the same level of accuracy with a small number of additional training
structures. PET-MAD demonstrates that accurate, fast, and robust
universal models can be trained using a tiny fraction of the structures
of last-generation datasets, and provides a feature-rich framework for
advanced atomistic simulations, which includes direct-force accelera-
tion and inexpensive end-to-end uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Results
PET-MAD is a generally applicable machine-learning interatomic
potential based on PET (an unconstrained, transformer-based graph
neural network architecture) and a custom training set built on the
principles of Massive Atomistic Diversity (MAD) and internal con-
sistency of the reference energetics. We thoroughly test the perfor-
mance of PET-MAD against several benchmark datasets and compare it
with four widely used universal potentials. Six case studies complete
our analysis, showcasing and quantitatively assessing PET-MAD for
diverse classes of materials and advanced atomistic simulations,
comparing a system-speciﬁc PET version trained on an ad hoc dataset,
the generally-applicable PET-MAD, and the versionsﬁne-tuned to each
system. We emphasize that in all of these examples, we focus on the
consistency of the model with the electronic-structure reference,
irrespective of the actual accuracy of the latter in reproducing
experimental quantities.
MAD dataset
Most of the existing efforts to generate datasets to train universal
models focus on either inorganic crystals
14,16,19 or molecular
compounds20, and aim to include as many structures as possible. PET-
MAD is trained on the Massive Atomistic Diversity (MAD) dataset,
which is based on a different philosophy. First, it aims to push the
limits of universality by including both organic and inorganic atomistic
systems of all possible dimensionalities. This approach has already
been shown to deliver good transferability upon including up to 45
elements in the training data
21. Second, our resulting model is meant to
work in complex atomistic simulation protocols describing a wide
range of thermodynamic conditions, which requires covering a large
conﬁguration space and being computationally affordable. To this
end, the MAD dataset includes randomized and highly-distorted
structures in the training set, applying to solids and surfaces ideas
similar to those that drove the development of “mindless” molecular
benchmark sets
22. Third, the reference electronic-structure calcula-
tions are designed to be robust an d consistent, to ensure that the
structural and chemical motifs are treated in the same way, regardless
of the type of structure they are part of, which is important for a
coherent structure-energy mapping. This choice neglects, or approx-
imates poorly, the description of effects such as spin polarization,
electron correlation, and dispersion, which are important for certain
classes of materials but cannot be applied consistently across the MAD
dataset. Details of the electronic-structure calculations are given in
“First-principles calculations”. Last but not least, we restrict the dataset
to fewer than 100,000 structures in order to reduce the time and cost
of training, making the entire training procedure accessible to a wider
community. As we shall see, the strategy we use allows us to preserve
the representative power of the dataset.
The MAD dataset contains 95,595 structures of 85 elements in
total (with atomic numbers ranging from 1 to 86, except Astatine) and
consists of 8 subsets that cover a diverse range of chemical and
structural motifs. The largest subset, MC3D, contains 33,596 bulk
crystal structures from the Materials Cloud 3D database
23.I t sd i v e r s i -
ﬁed variants, MC3D-rattled and MC3D-random, comprise 30,044 and
2800 structures, respectively, where the former is generated by add-
ing Gaussian noise to atomic positions, and the latter by randomly
reassigning atomic species within selected crystals. Additional struc-
tural diversity is introduced by MC3D-surface, which includes
5589 surface slabs cleaved along low-index planes, and MC3D-cluster,
consisting of 9071 nanoclusters cut from random bulk environments.
Complementing these, MC2D provides 2676 two-dimensional crystals
from the Materials Cloud 2D database
24. Finally, the SHIFTML-molcrys
and SHIFTML-molfrags subsets contribute 8578 molecular crystals and
3241 neutral molecular fragments, respectively, both derived from the
SHIFTML and Cambridge Structural Database collections
25–27.Am o r e
detailed description of the subsets is given in Methods, and in Sup-
plementary Table 1.
The number of structures in each subset represents the total
number of structures that were successfully converged in DFT calcu-
lations, afterﬁltering out a few outlier conﬁgurations with forces above
al a r g et h r e s h o l d( 1 0 0e V /Å for MC3D-rattled and MC3D-random, and
10 eV/Å for the other subsets). Speci ﬁc details on the generation of
MAD subsets are given in “MAD dataset construction” and in a dedi-
cated public data record (see “Data availability”).
Model architecture and training
The PET architecture18 is a rotationally unconstrained and transformer-
based graph neural network (GNN) which has a high descriptive power
(as every transformer layer can be scaled to be a universal
approximator)
18 and low inference cost (as we shall demonstrate in
“Benchmarking”). For PET-MAD, we chose the architecture based on an
extensive hyperparameter search, resulting in a model with approxi-
mately 2.8 million parameters in total. Before training, each subset of
MAD was randomly shufﬂed and further split into training, validation,
and test subsets in fractions of 80%, 10%, and 10%, respectively. All
subsets were then merged to obtain the ﬁnal training, validation, and
test sets. More details on the architecture and training are available in
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 2

[page 3]
“PET model”, “Training of PET-MAD”, and Supplementary Information.
In order to improve the performance of PET-MAD on speciﬁc chemical
systems, we used a ﬁne-tuning strategy based on the low-rank adap-
tation technique (LoRA)28.D e t a i l so nﬁne-tuning are further discussed
in “Fine-tuning”.
The model also includes uncertainty-quanti ﬁcation capabilities,
based on the last-layer prediction rigidity (LLPR) method 29.E r r o r
estimation is especially important for a model aiming to be generally-
applicable, and that (despite the high diversity of the MAD training set)
may often be used for out-of-domain predictions. As shown in Sup-
plementary Note 8, the calibrated LLPR uncertainties correlate well
with the empirical test-set errors, while adding negligible overhead on
top of energy predictions. Given that PET-MAD is intended for use in
advanced simulations that estimate observable quantities through
sophisticated sampling protocols, it is essential to be able to propagate
the energy errors onto the ﬁnal quantity of interest. To this end, we
generate a shallow ensemble based on the LLPR covariance
29. Unlike
standard ensemble-based methods 30, which typically introduce a
computational overhead proportional to the number of ensemble
members, both LLPR and the shallow ensemble method
31 allow
uncertainty quantiﬁcation at negligible additional cost. Moreover, they
allow one to compute errors on any derived quantities using direct
ensemble propagation, as we demonstrate for free-energy calculations
in “Melting point of GaAs”, and for phonon dispersion curves in Sup-
plementary Note 9. Details on our uncertainty-quantiﬁcation approach
are summarized in “Uncertainty quantiﬁcation” and explained thor-
oughly in the Supplementary Information. Even though PET-MAD is
designed to evaluate forces using backpropagation, we also train a
separate head that predicts forces directly as a function of the atomic
coordinates. Avoiding backpropagation makes the model two to three
times faster (as we show in “Benchmarking”), but should be used with
care, as it violates energy conservation with pathological con-
sequences on sampling accuracy
32. We address these problems in
Supplementary Note 12, where we also show how a multiple-time-step
integrator allows one to retain the computational advantages of direct
force predictions without introducing sampling artifacts.
Benchmarking
First, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of combining the MAD dataset and
the PET architecture by comparing the accuracy of PET-MAD against
other universal models on the popular Matbench Discovery
benchmark33. We analyze the overall gain in models ’ accuracies with
the increase in the training set size and the number of trainable
parameters.
Since PET-MAD is trained on the MAD dataset, which has different
DFT settings compared to the Matbench Discovery (which shares
common settings with the training sets of other reference models), we
recomputed a random subset of the benchmark containing 555 struc-
tures (excluding lanthanides and actinides) using MAD-compatible
DFT settings. We evaluate the accuracies of all models on this subset,
picking for each model the DFT reference compatible with its training
set. Fig. 1 demonstrates the Pareto frontier of the models ’ data efﬁ-
ciency: Pareto-optimal models efﬁciently use additional training data
to increase their accuracy. PET-MAD signiﬁcantly improves on existing
models, achieving the accuracy of other advanced universal MLIPs
such as SevenNet and GNoME using 1–3 orders of magnitude less data.
For illustrative purposes, the ﬁgure also shows the accuracy of PET-
MAD evaluated against the inconsistent Matbench Discovery ener-
getics: the 3 × larger error is entirely due to the discrepancy in the
reference data. A thorough analysis of DFT consistency effects is dis-
cussed in the Supplementary Note 4.
The ﬁgure also shows that many of the optimal models use a very
large number of parameters, which makes them accurate but com-
putationally demanding, and therefore not suitable for the long,
complex simulation tasks that PET-MAD is designed for. For this rea-
son, we will focus on medium-size models for the rest of these
benchmarks: MACE-MP-0
11, MatterSim12,O r b - v 213 and SevenNet34. Like
PET-MAD, these models have been designed and are widely used for
advanced materials simulations beyond single-point calculations. We
e x t e n dt h ec o m p a r i s o no nM a t b e n c hD i s c o v e r yt oi n c l u d eo t h e r
popular atomistic machine learning benchmarks for bulk inorganic
systems, molecular systems, and catalytic applications, namely MPtrj
14,
Alexandria19, OC2020 (S2EF) 35,S P I C E20,a n dM D 2 2 36.Ad e t a i l e d
description of the structure types entering each benchmark is pro-
vided in Supplementary Table 2. In evaluating the benchmarks, it is
important to keep in mind that (1) most of the reference models are
larger than PET-MAD (we use the versions with the largest number of
parameters in their families, MACE-MP-0-L and MatterSim-5M, Orb-v2,
SevenNet-l3i5 having respectively about 15.8 M, 4.6 M, 25 M, and 1.17 M
parameters, as opposed to 2.8 M for PET-MAD) and (2) they are trained
on much larger datasets (1.58 M, 17 M, 32.1 M, and 1.58 M structures,
respectively).
The benchmarking results are presented in Table 1.W e ﬁnd that
PET-MAD achieves high accuracy in predicting both energies and
interatomic forces, outperforming MACE-MP-0-L in most cases, and
competing closely with MatterSim-5M and SevenNet-l3i5 even for the
inorganic datasets they are trained on. Upon using a consistent level of
DFT theory, PET-MAD outperforms all other models in predicting raw
energies of the WBM crystals from the Matbench Discovery
benchmark
33.O r b - v 2p e r f o r m ss i g n iﬁcantly better than all other
models on MPtrj and Alexandria, which are part of its training set. PET-
MAD outperforms all other models on molecular datasets such as
SPICE and MD22, and matches Orb-v2 also on the OC2020 S2EF –
which is a strongly extrapolative exercise as MAD does not include
conﬁgurations of adsorbed molecules.
The reference models perform much worse than PET-MAD on the
(consistently recomputed) MAD benchmark. This is not too surprising,
as MAD is designed to be more diverse than the datasets on which
these models are trained. Still, it is instructive to assess separately the
accuracy of the various models on the different sections of MAD
(Fig. 2). PET-MAD outperforms MACE-MP-0-L, MatterSim-5M, and
SevenNet-l3i5 in almost all cases. The accuracy is similar (and in a few
cases slightly better) for the stable inorganic structures, including bulk
(MC3D) and layered (MC2D) compounds. MC3D-derived surfaces and
clusters show slightly larger force and considerably larger energy
Fig. 1 | Pareto frontier of various universal MLIPs.The number of conﬁgurations
in the training set is shown on the x-axis, and y-axis shows mean absolute error
(MAE) for the energy-above-hull property on a subset of the WBM dataset
15 (a part
of the Matbench Discovery benchmark33). Colored dots represent a set of selected
models, each with a corresponding number of parameters shown in color, while
other models from the benchmark are shown with grey dots. PET-MAD results are
shown with diamonds for both consistent and inconsistent DFT references, where
the latter is shown with a shaded label. PET-MAD signiﬁcantly pushes the frontier
(dotted line) downward, achieving the accuracy of other advanced universal MLIPs
like SevenNet and GNoME using 1-3 orders of magnitude less data.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 3

[page 4]
errors. Errors of the other universal models are up to 50 times larger
for the distorted subsets (MC3D-rattled and MC3D-randcomp) which
contain especially unusual, diverse con ﬁgurations. MatterSim-5M,
which is trained on a broader, yet unpublished, set of conﬁgurations,
performs substantially better than the other models. The most notable
difference occurs in the molecular systems (SHIFTML-molcrys and
SHIFTML-molfrags), where PET-MAD dramatically outperforms all
other models. This result is again expected, as organic systems
represent a completely different region of conﬁguration space, which
is heavily undersampled in the case of inorganic crystal datasets. The
last model from the reference list, Orb-v2, requires a separate discus-
sion, as it provides by default direct, non-conservative force predic-
tions. Orb-v2 outperforms all other models (including, marginally, PET-
MAD) on relaxed inorganic systems, presumably thanks to the com-
bination of aﬂexible, unconstrained architecture and the large training
s e t( w h i c hi n c l u d e sb o t ht h eM P t r j
14 and Alexandria19 datasets). How-
ever, it still provides worse accuracy on rattled, random composition
structures, surfaces and molecular systems compared to PET-MAD.
Both PET-MAD and Orb-v2 use architectures that do not enforce exact
rotational equivariance, which is learned approximately by data aug-
mentation. The resulting symmetry breaking can be monitored and
controlled easily
37, but it is important to assess its extent. To do so, we
estimated the symmetry error in PET-MAD and Orb-v2 energy
predictions by applying a series of rotations on a Lebedev-Laikov grid
of order 9 for each structure in the MAD subset and calculating the
standard deviation in the predictions (Fig. 2, right panel). In most
cases, the rotational discrepancy of the PET-MAD model is one or two
orders of magnitude smaller than the corresponding prediction error,
below 1 meV/atom for all subsets except MC3D-random and MC3D-
cluster. Orb-v2 shows signi ﬁcantly higher discrepancies in energy
predictions, which are at times comparable to the actual errors.
The PET-MAD model is also computationally ef ﬁcient, which
facilitates simulating larger time and length scales. We compared the
throughput of molecular dynamics simulations of systems of different
sizes and densities (solid aluminum, diamond, and liquid water, see
Fig. 3) and, when available, used lighter versions of the reference
models compared to those used in the accuracy benchmarks (namely,
MACE-MP-0 M, MatterSim-1M, and SevenNet-0). These models have
fewer parameters and thus allow faster inference at the expense of
accuracy, making this a more challenging test for the speed of PET-
MAD. Nevertheless, we see that PET-MAD is faster and more memory
efﬁcient than all models. When exploiting the computational advan-
tage of direct-force prediction, PET-MAD is also competitive with the
non-conservative Orb-v2 model.
The takeaway is that an unconstrained architecture and a
problem-agnostic construction of the training set make PET-MAD
Fig. 2 | Comparison of the accuracies of the universal MLIPs on the MAD
dataset. PET-MAD (black line), MACE-MP-0-L (blue line), Orb-v2 (orange line),
MatterSim-5M (green line), and SevenNet-l3i5 (red line) models' results are resolved
by different MAD subsets. The left and center panels show the mean absolute errors
in energies and force predictions. The right panel shows the rotational discrepancy
in energy predictions of the unconstrained models (PET-MAD and Orb-v2). Results
for all models except PET-MAD were obtained using consistently recalculated
reference values (i.e., computed with MPtrj dataset settings) to achieve consistency
with the training sets of the corresponding reference models. See also Table 1 for
benchmarks on out-of-sample datasets.
Table 1 | Comparison of PET-MAD accuracies on popular atomistic machine learning datasets against MACE-MP-0-L, Mat-
terSim-5M, Orb-v2, and SevenNet-l3i5 models
Dataset PET-MAD MACE-MP-0-L MatterSim-5M Orb-v2 SevenNet
MAD 17.6 ∣ 65.1 81.6∣181.5 47.3 ∣133.7 52.9 ∣96.2 82.1 ∣173.5
MPtrj 22.3 ∣77.9 15.1 ∣50.8 21.3 ∣61.4 5.6 ∣ 21.9 9.8∣25.5
Matbench 31.3 ∣ — 58.5∣— 38.2 ∣— 37.9∣— 47.5∣—
Alexandria 49.0 ∣66.8 65.4 ∣79.5 21.2 ∣39.9 13.2 ∣ 10.5 47.6∣70.3
OC2020 18.3 ∣114.5 82.4 ∣169.6 31.5 ∣119.2 19.8 ∣ 99.3 45.7∣162.7
SPICE 3.7 ∣ 59.5 10.6∣166.8 21.3 ∣145.6 59.0 ∣140.8 11.3 ∣139.1
MD22 1.9 ∣ 65.6 9.4∣182.9 28.6 ∣160.4 174.3 ∣220.7 11.1 ∣146.2
For each dataset and model, mean absolute errors are reported for raw energy∣forces predictions (in units of meV/atom∣meV/Å). The best results for each benchmark are shown in bold. We do not
show force errors for the Matbench Discovery subset, since forces are not available in the reference data.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 4

[page 5]
competitive in speed and accuracy with models that have a larger
number of parameters and are trained on much larger datasets (Fig.1).
This has important implications to guide the design of future datasets
and provides a more sustainable and accessible platform to support
model development.
Benchmarking accuracies alone, however, do not ensure that PET-
MAD can be reliably used in realistic atomistic modeling scenarios.
Therefore, in the following sections, we demonstrate the applicability
of PET-MAD for atomistic simulations by comparing its performance
against single-purpose and ﬁne-tuned models for six diverse and
challenging use cases.
Ionic transport in lithium thiophosphate
Lithium thiophosphates (LPS) are a class of materials that have been
intensely studied as electrolytes for solid-state batteries
38. The arche-
typal member of this class, Li 3PS4, has been the subject of several
computational investigations, including ref.39, which we use both as a
blueprint for this benchmark and the source of the system-speci ﬁc
dataset. Following the same approach as in that reference, we compute
the ionic conductivity σ (one of the key properties for the technolo-
g i c a la p p l i c a t i o n so fL P S )o ft h r e ek n o w np h a s e so fL i
3PS4, α, β and γ40,
using molecular dynamics and the Green-Kubo theory of linear
response
41.
We compare the results obtained using the PET-MAD potential
with a single-purpose PET potential trained from scratch over the
dataset from ref. 39 (PET-Bespoke), and with one ﬁne-tuned over the
same dataset using the LoRA technique (see “Fine-tuning” for more
details, and the SI for a full discussion). For this dataset, the validation
mean absolute error (MAE) of PET-MAD for energy∣forces is 4.9 meV/
atom∣63.9 meV/Å, to be compared with 1.2 meV/atom∣35.6 meV/Å,f o r
a model trained from scratch on the LPS dataset, and 1.3 meV/
atom∣36.0 meV/Å for the ﬁne-tuned model. Fig. 4 shows the values of
the conductivity for all the phases and over a wide range of tempera-
tures computed with PET-MAD (black), a model ﬁne-tuned using the
LoRA algorithm with rank 8 (orange), and the PET-Bespoke model
(blue). For all three phases, PET-MAD is in excellent agreement with the
bespoke and ﬁne-tuned models, demonstrating quantitative accuracy
despite the larger validation error. For the γ-phase, PET-MAD slightly
overestimates the temperature at which the transition to a high-
conductivity phase occurs. Except for this minor discrepancy, PET-
MAD shows excellent agreement with the more accurate dedicated
models, capturing the change of behavior inσ following the rotation of
the PS
4 tetrahedra39. The results agree quantitatively with those of
ref. 39, despite being based on slightly different DFT parameters and
relying on a different class of MLIPs.
Melting point of GaAs
Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) is a III-V semiconductor whose properties
make it a good choice to manufacture the high-quality optical and
electrical devices, as well as high-end photovoltaics.
The growth of GaAs nanostructures often relies on the coex-
istence of solid GaAs and molten Ga in an As-rich atmosphere
42. Cor-
responding computational studies typically require MLIPs that can
accurately describe different phases and compositions across the Ga/
Fig. 3 | Inference time of several universal MLIPs evaluated over different bulk
materials and system sizes. For each MLIP, we use its LAMMPS65 interface if
available, preferably choosing the Kokkos-enabled67 (kk) version, or its ASE68
interface otherwise. All timings were measured on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU.
Missing points for MACE-MP-0 and SevenNet caused by out-of-memory errors are
marked with red crosses. Color code of the lines is consistent with the one used in
Fig. 2. The non-conservative (NC) versions of Orb-v2 and PET-MAD are shown in
dashed orange and grey lines, respectively. These models beneﬁt from a theoretical
speedup, but can violate conservation of energy, often resulting in ill-behaved
molecular dynamics
32. The model versions used were MatterSim-v1.0.0-1M, MACE-
MP-0 (M), Orb-v2, SevenNet-0 (11Jul2024).
Fig. 4 | Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivityσ for the α, β,a n dγ
phases of Li3PS4. The ﬁgure compares the values ofσ from PET-MAD (black), aﬁne-
tuned model (orange), and a bespoke PET model trained from scratch (blue).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 5

[page 6]
As phase diagram. Electronic properties change wildly between dif-
ferent phases, posing additional challenges to the construction of
empirical potentials. Following the work of Imbalzano et al. 43,w e
repeat the calculation of the melting point of stoichiometric GaAs at
ambient pressure with the interface pinning method. This method
computes the differences in chemical potentials between the liquid
and solid phases, and the melting point is determined by identifying
the temperature at which the chemical potential difference becomes
zero. A combination of the LLPR ensemble predictions with the
reweighting technique allows us to propagate errors on the chemical
potential curves
44, and therefore assess the contribution of the epis-
temic part of the error to the melting point error caused by limitations
of the ML ﬁt.
Figure 5 demonstrates these calculations, comparing the PET-
MAD model with a bespoke PET model trained on the reference GaAs
training set, and the LoRA-ﬁne-tuned model on the same training set.
The test set errors (MAE) on energy∣forces are 14.4 meV/at.∣74.1 meV/Å,
for PET-MAD, 0.7 meV/at.∣29.0 meV/Å, for PET-Bespoke and 1.3 meV/
at.∣45.3 meV/Å, for PET-MAD-LoRA. When it comes to the estimation of
the melting point, the LoRA and Bespoke models are in quantitative
agreement (1169 ± 3 K vs 1169 ± 4 K) whilst the PET-MAD model pre-
dicts a slightly smaller value of 1111 ± 72 K. The predicted error is
consistent with the lower accuracy of the general-purpose PET-MAD,
which highlights the importance of the inexpensive uncertainty pro-
pagation afforded by the LLPR ensemble architecture implemented in
our PET models. It should be noted that the error of the general-
purpose model against the bespoke potentials is very small compared
to the deviation of the computed melting point from the experimen-
tally measured melting point (1511 K), and with the typical errors of
empirical force ﬁelds. This large discrepancy is consistent with that
observed in ref. 43, and can be attributed to shortcomings of the
reference electronic-structure calculations– which is not uncommon
as the computed melting point of a given material can vary by hun-
dreds of Kelvins depending on the choice of DFT functional
45.
Surface segregation in high-entropy alloys
High-entropy alloys – containing 5 or more metals in roughly equi-
molar composition– often possess excellent mechanical properties46,
and perform well as heterogeneous catalysts 47. Investigating their
properties and exploring efﬁciently their composition space requires
versatile models that can handle a high degree of chemical diversity.
We replicate some of the simulations in ref. 48,u s i n gP E T - M A Dt o
study the segregation of different elements at the (111) surface of the
CoCrFeMnNi alloy, a prototypical HEA
46. Modeling of the differential
surface propensity of the elements in the alloy— which is central to the
applications of HEAs as heterogeneous catalysts — requires a combi-
nation of replica-exchange molecular dynamics with Monte-Carlo
atom swaps (REMD/MC) to overcome the slow diffusivity, and the
existence of free-energy barriers to segregation starting from a ran-
dom alloy. This example allows us to demonstrate the capabilities of
PET-MAD in complex computational workﬂows, to assess the ability of
the model to describe surface effects that are often overlooked in
other universal models
49, and to test ﬁnetuning over a dataset with a
greater degree of chemical diversity than the other examples we
consider. We use the Gibbs surface excess calculated at 800 K using
the REMD/MC protocol (see Methods for computational details) as a
measure of surface segregation in a CoCrFeMnNi surface slab. We
compare three models: the pre-trained PET-MAD, PET trained from
scratch (PET-Bespoke), and the ﬁne-tuned model (PET-MAD-LoRA),
where the last two were trained on a subset of the HEA25S dataset
48,
recomputed with MAD dataset DFT settings for consistency (details on
the subset selection are given in Methods). The validations MAEs of
all three models on energy ∣forces are 25.8 meV/atom ∣175.1 meV/ Å,
14.6 meV/atom ∣138.3 meV/ Å, and 9.4 meV/atom ∣124.8 meV/ Å,
respectively.
Results of the surface excess calculation are given in Fig. 6. First,
we note that the segregation pattern obtained from both pre-trained
and ﬁne-tuned models is almost identical and quantitatively matches
the results from ref. 48, which corresponds to surface layers enriched
in nickel and depleted in other elements. Both these models agree
qualitatively with the results of the PET-Bespoke model, but there is a
more pronounced quantitative difference in the surface excess values.
In interpreting this discrepancy, one should keep in mind that, con-
trary to other examples, we only recomputed about 2000 structures
out of the 30’000 in the HEA25S, and so a bespoke model incurs a high
risk of overﬁtting – which is also consistent with the learning curves
reported in the SI. This case study demonstrates that pre-trained PET-
MAD is capable of capturing all effects relevant to surface segregation
in HEAs and providing advanced sampling capabilities of the HEA
Fig. 5 | Chemical potential differences between liquid and solid GaAs phases as
a function of temperature.The results are computed with PET-MAD (black), PET-
Bespoke (blue) and PET-MAD-LoRA (orange) models. The dashed solid lines indi-
cate the mean values of the predictedΔμ, and the light colored lines represent the
reweighted predictions from the individual members of the shallow ensemble. The
large spread of the PET-MAD ensemble predictions correctly reﬂects the dis-
crepancy with respect to the Bespoke and LoRA-ﬁne-tuned model.
Fig. 6 | Gibbs surface excess Γa of the elements on a (111) surface of the
CoCrFeMnNi alloy.The results are obtained from the REMD/MC simulation at 800
K performed with the pre-trained PET-MAD model (black bars), bespoke PET model
trained on a subset of the HEA25S dataset (blue bars), and the PET-MAD-LoRA
model, ﬁne-tuned on the same subset (orange bars). Both pre-trained and ﬁne-
tuned models result in almost identical segregation patterns with the surface
enriched in nickel, which is similar to one from ref.48. The inconsistency between
the bespoke and ﬁne-tuned models is most likely due to the bespoke model’s
overﬁtting.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 6

[page 7]
chemical and structural space without being speci ﬁcally trained on
HEA data.
Quantum nuclear effects in liquid water
Water is a widely studied system because of its high biological, envir-
onmental, and technological signi ﬁcance, as well as the many
anomalies in its physical properties, which can be traced to the strong
hydrogen bonds that form local tetrahedral motifs. Due to its light
hydrogen atoms, accounting for nuclear quantum effects (NQEs) is
fundamental in order to extract accurate observables for liquid water,
even at room temperature
50. In this example, we employ path integral
molecular dynamics (PIMD) to model nuclear quantum effects in the
simulation of a medium-sized periodic system consisting of 128 water
molecules (384 atoms).
We ﬁrst evaluate the O-O and O-H pair correlation functions,
which report on inter-molecular structural correlations, and show the
extent of intra-molecular quantum ﬂuctuations, respectively.
Additionally, we calculate the constant-volume heat capacity at 298 K
— a physical quantity that exhibits very pronounced quantum effects,
and that requires the use of sophisticated path integral estimators that
are notoriously difﬁcult to converge
51. We compare (1) the PET-MAD
model, (2) a system-speciﬁc PET model trained on the dataset from ref.
52, with energies and forces recomputed at the same level of theory
used for MAD, (3) a PET-MAD model which wasﬁne-tuned on the same
recomputed water dataset and (4) values for a simple classical force-
ﬁeld that reproduces well most of the experimental properties of water
and allows us to demonstrate the slow convergence of some of the
estimators
53.
The main takeaways from this comparison (shown in Fig. 7)a r e
that (1) PET-MAD inherits the ten dency of GGA functionals to over-
estimate the melting point of water, leading to room temperature
simulations of a highly undercooled liquid, that is overstructured, with
excessive delocalization of protons along H bonds, and a heat capacity
that is closer to that of ice than to water; and (2) that the general-
purpose model is in excellent agreement with the bespoke models,
both in classical simulations and in path integral simulations that are
sufﬁcient to converge the pair-correlation function, and approach
convergence of the heat capacity. This is signi ﬁcant as it proves that
PET-MAD can be used reliably even when probing the large intra-
molecular distortions induced by zero-pointﬂuctuations, and that it is
fast enough to afford the large overhead of path-integral simulations
with complex estimators – even though it cannot escape the limita-
tions of the electronic-structure reference.
Quantum nuclear effects in NMR crystallography
We now consider the impact of quantum nuclear ﬂuctuations in a
different context, evaluating how they affect the nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) chemical shieldings in organic crystals, and hence
how they affect NMR crystallography. In the prototypical NMR crys-
tallography workﬂow, chemical shieldings are computed for a set of
static candidate structures, and compared with those measured
experimentally for an unknown polymorph
54. The most likely candi-
date structure is then taken to be the one for which the experimentally
measured and computed shieldings best agree.
NMR shieldings result from the averaging of instantaneous values
of structures distorted by thermal and quantum ﬂuctuations, which
can be sampled computationally by performing MLIP-driven (PI)MD
simulations and then evaluating the chemical shieldings using a
bespoke machine learning model for succinic acid crystals. We
Fig. 7 | Radial distribution functions g (top) and heat capacity CV (bottom) of
liquid water with nuclear quantum effects.The results are obtained using PIMD
simulations at 298 K and 1 atm. with PET-MAD, a ﬁne-tuned version of PET-MAD,
and a bespoke PET model, shown in black (squares), orange (triangles), and blue
(circles) lines and symbols, respectively. Solid lines show the radial distribution
function of O-O and O-H pairs from the PIMD (quantum) simulation, and classic MD
results are shown in dashed lines for comparison. C
V is given as a function of the
number of beads employed in the PIMD simulation. Results on the g and CV
obtained with the empirical q-TIP4P/F forceﬁeld (reproduced from ref.69) are also
i n c l u d e df o rc o m p a r i s o na n ds h o w ni ng r e e nl i n e sa n dd o t s .
Fig. 8 | Computed chemical shielding distribution of 1Hi n α succinic acid
crystals.The inset shows the hydrogen bonding pattern in the succinic acid dimer
of α-succinic acid. The results are obtained using PET-MAD (black), PET-MAD-LoRA
(orange) and PET-Bespoke (blue) models for PIMD (solid) and MD (dotted) simu-
lations. Shieldings of the static geometry (PET-MAD only) are shown as vertical lines
(carboxylic H3 site around 15 ppm and an average of the aliphatic H1 and H2 sites
around 28 ppm).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 7

[page 8]
simulate in particular the α p o l y m o r p ho fs u c c i n i ca c i d ,o n eo ft h e
structures investigated in a previous study55 from which we also obtain
the training structures to build bespoke shielding and MLIP models
(the test set accuracies (MAE) on energy ∣forces are 12.5 meV/
atom∣106.1 meV/Å for PET-MAD, 3.1 meV/atom ∣86.0 meV/Å for PET-
Bespoke and 2.0 meV/atom ∣64.5 meV/Å for PET-MAD-LoRA). In line
with the excellent accuracy of PET-MAD for molecular crystals, we
observe near-perfect agreement between the distributions of chemical
shieldings obtained with the three potentials (Fig. 8), with both clas-
sical and quantum sampling – the latter showing a large downward
shift and broadening of the
1H shielding distributions, especially for
the H-bonded protons, qualitatively the same observation that Engel
and coworkers make in ref. 55 using a bespoke MLIP trained on PBE0-
MBD reference calculations. As in the case of water, these results
demonstrate the ability of PET-MAD to describe quantum nuclear
ﬂuctuations. By combining MLIP-driven sampling with models of
functional properties, such as the chemical shieldings, one can extend
the reach of a general-purpose model beyond structural and energetic
predictions.
Dielectric response of barium titanate
To conclude our benchmarking series, we study the ability of PET-MAD
to describe the dielectric properties of materials using barium titanate
system as an example. Barium titanate (BaTiO
3, BTO) is a prototypical
ferroelectric perovskite that undergoes a sequence of temperature-
dependent structural phase transitions: rhombohedral (R, below 183
K), orthorhombic (O, 183–278 K), tetragonal (T, 278–393 K), and cubic
(C, above 393 K)
56. The ferroelectricity in BTO arises from off-center
displacements of the Ti atom within the oxygen octahedron, which
break centrosymmetry in the lower-temperature phases. These dis-
placements are fundamental to its ferroelectric behavior and phase
transitions
57, making BTO an ideal model system for studying ferroe-
lectricity in perovskites.
To evaluate the capability of PET-MAD in characterizing ferroe-
lectricity in this material, we performﬂexible-cell MD simulations for a
320-atom model of BTO over a temperature range of 40 –400 K at
constant ambient pressure, following the same protocol as in ref. 58
and as reported in the Methods. Once again, we recompute consistent
energetics for the material-speciﬁc dataset, to build bespoke andﬁne-
tuned PET models. Test-set MAEs on energy ∣forces are 12.67 meV/
atom∣27.96 meV/Å for PET-MAD, 0.23 meV/atom ∣9.41 meV/Å for the
bespoke model, and 0.12 meV/atom ∣3.92 meV/ Å for the LoRA- ﬁne-
tuned model, respectively.
We then analyze the sampled con ﬁguration within a reduced-
dimensionality collective variable landscape derived from a subset of
neighbor density coefﬁcients
58 (shown in the inset of Fig.9). Measuring
the populations of different phases by a clustering algorithm allows us
to estimate their relative chemical potential, and hence the transition
temperatures between the different phases. Similar to what is
observed in ref. 58, the transition temperatures are heavily under-
estimated with respect to experiments (due to a combination of DFT
shortcomings andﬁnite-size effects), but there is excellent agreement
between PET-MAD and the two bespoke models. The largest dis-
crepancy, for the T-C transition, is below 30 K—a remarkable accuracy
for a model with such broad applicability.
To further assess the reliability of PET-MAD in predicting func-
tional properties, we also compute the temperature-dependent static
dielectric tensor ϵ
r (Fig. 9), by estimating the covariance of the total
polarization, computed in turn using an equivariant linear model
trained on the polarization dataset of ref. 58 (more details in the
Methods). All models predict qualitatively the large value ofϵ
r for the
paraelectric, cubic phase, which increases greatly as it approaches the
ferroelectric transition temperature, and then takes smaller values in
the tetragonal and orthorhombic phases (which have multiple
inequivalent optical axes). As it is the case of the transition
temperatures, the two specialized models are in near-perfect agree-
ment, while the PET-MAD simulations slightly underestimateϵ
r in the T
phase, and yield a curve in the C phase that is shifted by about 25 K,
consistent with the lower Curie temperature. Overall, this ﬁnal exam-
ple demonstrates once more that, despite considerably larger test
errors than for a bespoke model, PET-MAD captures with close-to-
quantitative accuracy subtle physical effects, and can be used to drive
complicated, advanced materials modeling protocols.
Discussion
PET-MAD pushes the boundaries of what generally-applicable uni-
versal machine learning potentials can achieve, providing out-of-the-
box semi-quantitative accuracy for both inorganic and organic mate-
rials benchmarks, as well as for six demonstrative applications cover-
ing a very broad range of material types and advanced simulation
techniques. Moreover, it does so while being trained on a data set that
is orders of magnitude smaller than those used for current state-of-the-
art models. This observation suggests that the computational budget
for training set construction can be best allocated by pursuing internal
consistency and a high degree of structural and chemical diversity —
two guiding principles which underlie the construction of the MAD
dataset we introduce here. A compact dataset facilitates model train-
ing and optimization, as well as the transition to more accurate and
computationally demanding approximations to the electronic-
structure problem.
The PET architecture we use is not constrained to follow rigorous
rotational invariance; nonetheless, it learns to make predictions that
are invariant to a high degree of accuracy. It achieves a high expres-
sivity thanks to its transformer module, while being faster than all the
conservative models we considered, and even faster when using non-
conservative forces. The availability of a reliable and inexpensive
uncertainty quantiﬁcation framework makes it possible to assess
model error and also its propagation to the ultimate quantity of
interest. In cases where this error is larger than desired, a simple ﬁne-
tuning procedure can be applied to further improve the accuracy for a
Fig. 9 | Temperature-dependent dielectric response of BTO.The results for three
PET models—the pre-trained PET-MAD, the bespoke PET model, and a LoRA-ﬁne-
tuned PET-MAD—are shown in black, blue, and orange lines, respectively. Vertical
dotted lines correspond to phase transition temperatures estimated from the
relative chemical potentials. Error bars correspond to standard deviations across
four independent MD runs. The inset shows the collective variable landscape dis-
tinguishing three separate phases, with the corresponding probabilities of occu-
pying each phase. The models consistently identify the different phases, as
evidenced by the contour plots at 0.5 probability centered on the basins corre-
sponding to each phase.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 8

[page 9]
speciﬁc target system, while maintaining the ability to make qualitative
predictions for the high-diversity test set. PET-MAD is easily accessible
from several atomic-scale simulators thanks to its integration within
the metatensor
59 ecosystem. It provides an ef ﬁcient and accurate
solution to perform simple and advanced atomistic simulations of
materials, and we expect it will serve as inspiration for future devel-
opments of both datasets and model architectures, as well as a reliable
engine to drive the design and discovery of new and better materials.
Methods
We provide a brief but complete overview of the procedure we fol-
lowed to construct the MAD dataset, to train the PET-MAD model, and
to ﬁne-tune single-purpose models. The simulation protocols for the
advanced simulation examples follow closely those of the cited pub-
lications, and are brieﬂy discussed in the SI for the convenience of the
reader.
MAD dataset construction
In four of the MAD subsets, namely MC3D 23,M C 2 D24,S H I F T M L -
molcrys25, and SHIFTML-molfrags 27, we simply used the published
structures, recalculating their energy and forces with the MAD DFT
settings provided in “First-principles calculations”. For the remaining
MC3D-based subsets, we always started from the original MC3D crys-
tals and made different structural modiﬁcations, with the sole goal of
improving coverage of the con ﬁguration space for highly-distorted,
unusual conﬁgurations. Structures in the MC3D-rattled subset were
obtained by selecting each MC3D crystal with more than one atom in
the unit cell and applying to the Cartesian coordinates of each atom a
Gaussian noise with zero mean and a standard deviation equal to 20%
of the corresponding covalent radii. The MC3D-randcomp subset was
created by ﬁrst taking the atomic positions and cell parameters of a
random crystal structure from the MC3D subset, then assigning ran-
dom atom types to every lattice site, andﬁnally adjusting isotropically
the total volume of the cell to match the total atomic volume calcu-
lated based on the covalent radii of the elements. The surface slabs in
the MC3D-surface subset were obtained by cleaving a randomly-
selected MC3D crystal along a random, symmetrically distinct crys-
tallographic plane with the maximum value of the Miller index (hkl)
equal to 3, also ensuring the orthogonality of the normal lattice vector
to the surface plane. The MC3D-cluster subset was constructed by
cutting a random spherical atomic environment containing between 2
and 8 atoms from a randomly selected MC3D crystal structure.
First-principles calculations
All datasets in this work (i.e., MAD and the reference subsets used for
benchmarking, as well as the single-purpose dataset for the six case
studies) were built by computing energies and forces using an identical
density functional theory (DFT) setup. We used the Quantum Espresso
v7.2 package
60,c o m p i l e dw i t ht h eS I R I U Sv 7 . 5 . 261 libraries as the pri-
mary DFT engine and AiiDA v2.6.362 as a workﬂow and task manager.
To reduce the possibility that some simulations would converge to
ambiguous magnetization states, all simulations were performed in a
non-magnetic setting, using the PBEsol exchange-correlation func-
tional. Even though this choice is known to have shortcomings for
several classes of materials– as shown by the discrepancy of some of
our examples with experiments – it allows us to generate predictions
for a highly diverse system with a high degree of stability and con-
verged numerical parameters. We described valence and semi-core
electrons using the standard solid-state pseudopotentials library
(SSSP) v1.2 (efﬁciency set)
63, with the most stringent settings for plane-
wave and charge-density cutoffs across the 85 elements (110 Ry and
1320 Ry, respectively). As discussed in the Supplementary Information,
using different settings to match the maximum cutoff of each struc-
ture would give substantial inconsistencies between the description of
some atomic types. Electronic smearing and partial occupancies were
described with a Marzari-Vanderbilt-DeVita-Payne cold smearing with
a spread of 0.01 Ry. In all periodic dimensions, the ﬁrst Brillouin zone
was sampled with aΓ-centered grid with a resolution of 0.125Å
−1,w h i l e
only the Γ point was used along the non-periodic dimensions. In the
case of non-periodic systems, we also applied a truncation scheme of
the Coulomb potential to avoid the interaction of periodic replicas of
the system through the periodic b oundary conditions: the Sohier-
Calandra-Mauri method for 2D systems and the Martyna-Tuckerman
correction for 0D systems. Along each non-periodic direction, we
additionally included a 25 Å vacuum to ensure convergence of the
truncation methods. A compositional baseline based on isolated atom
energies was subtracted from the DFT energies of each structure to
improve the numerical stability of training.
For most of the MAD subsets listed in the MAD dataset, the DFT
settings provided above ensured a good convergence rate of > 95%,
i.e. convergence was not achieved in less than 5% of the cases. The
exception is MC3D-random, for which only about 55% of the attempted
simulations converged. This result does not come as a surprise and can
be explained by the highly distorted state of these structures.
PET model
As our machine learning approach for ﬁtting interatomic potentials,
we employ the Point Edge Transformer (PET)18,w h i c hh a sb e e ns h o w n
to achieve state-of-the-art performance across a diverse set of bench-
marks spanning both molecular and materials domains. In essence,
PET is a graph neural network (GNN) where each message-passing layer
is implemented as an arbitrarily deep transformer. Speci ﬁcally, PET
maintains feature vectors (or messages) f
l
ij for every directed bond
between atomsi and j that lie within a speciﬁed cutoff radius. Here, the
superscriptl denotes the message-passing layer index, and eachf l
ij is a
ﬁxed-size vector (a token) of dimension dPET. These intermediate
representations are updated at each message-passing layer by a
transformer with an adjustable number of internal layers, invoked for
each atomic environment. At each message-passing layer, for each
atom i, the input tokens to the transformer consist of the message
vectors ff
l
ji gj coming from all neighbors j to the central atom i.T h e
transformer then applies a sequence-to-sequence transformation in a
permutation-covariant manner. Its outputs are subsequently inter-
preted as the new set of outbound messages from atom i to each
neighbor j, ff l +1
ij gj . Geometric information (i.e., the 3D positions of
neighbors) and chemical species are also incorporated into this pro-
cess. To obtain the desired target property (e.g., energy), PET applies
feed-forward neural networks to each representationf
l
ij and sums all
the outputs across bondsij and layers l.T h eP E Ta r c h i t e c t u r ei m p o s e s
no explicit rotational symmetry constraints, but learns to be equivar-
iant through data augmentation. This unconstrained approach yields
high theoretical expressivity: even a single layer of the model acts as a
universal approximator featuring virtually unlimited body order and
angular resolution. A detailed speciﬁcation of the architecture and the
full functional form can be found in ref. 18.
Training of PET-MAD
We split the MAD dataset into training, validation, and test parts by
separately shufﬂing each of the eight subsets, and selecting respec-
tively 80%, 10%, and 10% of the str uctures. The composition con-
tribution to the total energy of the structures wasﬁtted using a simple
linear model and subtracted to improve the training behavior. We used
a Pareto-optimal architecture (see the details on hyperparameter
optimization in the Supplementary Information) with a cutoff radius of
4.5 Å, 2 message-passing layers, each containing 2 transformer layers
with a token size of 256, 8 heads in the multi-head attention layer, 512
neurons in the output multi-layer perceptron. Training was performed
using the PyTorch framework and the metatrain package
59 on 8
NVIDIA H100 GPUs with a batch size of 24 structures per GPU for a total
of 1500 epochs and took about 40 hours. We used the Adam optimizer
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:10653 9

[page 10]
with an initial learning rate (LR) of 10 −4 and applied an LR scheduler,
which halved the LR every 250 epochs. The loss function was based on
a root-mean-square error difference between the model’s energy and
force predictions and the corresponding target values, with a scaling
factor of 0.1 applied to the energy contribution. Mean absolute errors
of the trained PET-MAD model were 7.3 meV/atom ∣43.2 meV/ Å in
energies and forces prediction on the train set. Validation set errors
were 14.7 meV/atom∣72.2 meV/Å, respectively.
Fine-tuning
Fine-tuning of the pre-trained PET-MAD model was performed using a
parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning technique based on low-rank adapta-
tion (LoRA)28. This method is widely used in the ML community, since it
allows to mitigatecatastrophic forgetting— the phenomenon of losing
accuracy on the base dataset while tuning the model on the new
dataset, which is inherent to conventional ﬁne-tuning, where all the
weights of the model are trainable64. In the LoRA approach, the weights
of the base model are frozen during the training, while an additional
set of trainable weights composed of two low-rank matrices is added to
each attention block of the model with a regularization factor, which
controls the inﬂuence of the low-rank matrices on the model’sw e i g h t s .
By adjusting rank and regularization factor, one can optimize theﬁne-
tuning work ﬂow to achieve better performance on speci ﬁc tasks,
without compromising entirely the ability to perform the more general
task. In this work, we used a rank of 8 and a scaling parameter of 0.5 for
all LoRA ﬁne-tuned models, unless otherwise speciﬁed.
In terms of raw accuracy on the specialized datasets, the evidence
in “Results” and Supplementary Note 11 indicate that ﬁne-tuning is
always beneﬁcial compared to training a specialized ad hoc model in
the low-data regime. Even though on larger datasets a specialized
model trained from scratch can exceed the accuracy of a ﬁne-tuned
model, this is not the case for many of the systems investigated in this
work, including barium titanate, succinic acid, lithium thiophosphate,
and high-entropy alloys.
LoRA-ﬁne-tuned models retain a varying degree of accuracy (see
the Supplementary Note 10 for details) on the generic structures from
the MAD dataset, while still providing practically equivalent obser-
vables from an ad-hoc fully specialized model. In general, we therefore
recommend employing LoRA if ﬁne-tuning PET-MAD for a speci ﬁc
application.
Uncertainty quantiﬁcation
We provide uncertainty quantiﬁcation for the PET-MAD model via the
LLPR method29, which produces a posteriori uncertainty estimates for
trained neural networks. The LLPR uncertainties can be computed
based on the covariance of the last-layer features over the training set,
and they can be evaluated at nearly no additional cost compared to the
raw predictions. The LLPR formalism is particularly suitable in the
context of this study, as it can be used to sample aﬁnite number of last-
layer weight sets. The resulting last-layer ensemble can be used to
propagate uncertainties through arbitrarily complex atomistic work-
ﬂows, by manipulating separately the outputs of the different
ensemble members, and/or using them to reweight the trajectories
generated by the mean of the ensemble
44.
Simulations details
In this section, we provide an overview of the methodology to explain
the technical challenges and provide a few details that can be useful to
appreciate the implications of the benchmark accuracy. Unless
otherwise speci ﬁed, the simulations were performed using the
LAMMPS package (27 Jun 2024) with Kokkos version 4.3.1
65.
Ionic transport in lithium thiophosphate. The ionic conductivities,σ,
were computed via the Green-Kubo theory of linear response41,w h i c h
is a practical framework to compute transport coefﬁcients of extended
systems39.F o ra ni 