[page 1]
Rapid Discovery of Stable Materials by Coordinate-free Coarse Graining
Rhys E. A. Goodall,1 Abhijith S. Parackal,2 Felix A. Faber,1 Rickard Armiento,2,∗and Alpha A. Lee1,†
1Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping University, Sweden
A fundamental challenge in materials science pertains to elucidating the relationship between
stoichiometry, stability, structure, and property. Recent advances have shown that machine learning
can be used to learn such relationships, allowing the stability and functional properties of materials
to be accurately predicted. However, most of these approaches use atomic coordinates as input and
are thus bottlenecked by crystal structure identiﬁcation when investigating novel materials. Our
approach solves this bottleneck by coarse-graining the inﬁnite search space of atomic coordinates
into a combinatorially enumerable search space. The key idea is to use Wyckoﬀ representations –
coordinate-free sets of symmetry-related positions in a crystal – as the input to a machine learning
model. Our model demonstrates exceptionally high precision in discovering new theoretically stable
materials, identifying 1,569 materials that lie below the known convex hull of previously calculated
materials from just 5,675ab-initio calculations. Our approach opens up fundamental advances in
computational materials discovery.
I. INTRODUCTION
Finding a needle in a haystack is often used as an
analogy for materials discovery. Only a small propor-
tion of viable material compositions (believed to be
of the orderO(1010) [1]) will have thermodynamically
stable polymorphs that are experimentally accessible.
Most approaches to tackle this challenge focus on pre-
dictive models for materials properties – metaphorical
sieves that ﬁlter out the hay. Here we seek an alterna-
tive approach: Can we signiﬁcantly cut down materials
space by changing how we represent materials – making
most of the hay disappear?
Ourapproachismotivatedbyaconceptubiquitousin
science: coarse-graining. Taking molecular chemistry,
for example, chemists typically build intuitions about
chemical properties using molecular graphs. Molecular
graphs are a coarse-grained representation of molecules,
with each graph corresponding to a unique ensemble
of atomic coordinates. Searching in the enumerable
space of molecular graphs, as opposed to the innumer-
able space of possible atomic coordinates, has enabled
the development of powerful computational tools [2, 3]
as well as eﬀorts that exhaustively enumerate chemical
space [4, 5].
In materials science, however, an analogous coarse-
grained representation of crystal structures is miss-
ing. Thus, we are left confronting the innumerable
search space problem. Composition-based approaches
can somewhat overcome this challenge [6–9] but do so
at the cost of discarding all information about the crys-
tal structures of the materials being considered. As
such, either extensive computational crystal structure
searching or lab-based experiments are required to val-
idate predictions.
One avenue to manoeuvre around this challenge has
been to explore restricted classes of structure proto-
types using novel descriptors, e.g. Perovskites [10–12],
quaternary Heuslers [13], or Elpasolites [14]. Specify-
ing the prototype avoids the need for crystal structure
∗Correspondence email address: rickard.armiento@liu.se
†Correspondence email address: aal44@cam.ac.uk
searching, empowering more extensive screening cam-
paigns as the computational cost of validation is greatly
reduced.
In this paper, we introduce an approach that gen-
eralises these prototype-restricted models by consider-
ing Wyckoﬀ representations – coordinate-free sets of
symmetry-related positions in a crystal. This frame-
work allows us to develop accurate machine learning
models for materials discovery tasks where the relaxed
crystal structure isa priori unknown.
We ﬁrst test the ability of our model to identify novel
stable materials across a diverse range of chemistries,
showing that it has a precision∼3 times larger than
state-of-the-art coordinate-free methods based on ele-
mental substitutions [15, 16]. We then evaluate the per-
formance of our model in identifying stable structures
within phase diagrams with diverse structures, showing
that our model ﬁnds low energy structures in the phase
diagram with∼5 times lower computational eﬀort. Fi-
nally, we develop a materials exploration pipeline that,
starting from an initial nucleus of known materials,
screens nearby materials space and allows the eﬃcient
discovery of new stable materials. We identify 1,569
hitherto unknown materials that are below the known
convex hull of previously calculated materials from just
5,675 ab-initio calculations.
II. RESULTS
A. Wyckoﬀ Representation Regression
Building an accurate machine learning model hinges
on identifying model inputs that are suﬃciently infor-
mative to allow the target variable to be predicted.
However, for a machine learning model to be useful in
practice, these inputs need to be signiﬁcantly cheaper
to obtain than the cost of labelling data. In the context
of materials discovery, previous works have shown that
virtual screening workﬂows based on Kohn-Sham den-
sity functional theory (DFT) can be used to identify
novel functional materials [17, 18]. Separately it has
been shown that accurate machine learning models can
be built for the formation energies of inorganic crys-
tals calculated via DFT using the DFT-relaxed crystal
arXiv:2106.11132v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Mar 2022

[page 2]
2
Ef = Wren
...
Enumerate Wyckoff 
Representations of
Novel Materials
Predict Formation Energy from 
Wyckoff Representation using 
Machine Learning Model
ΔEhull 
 < 0  
ΔEhull 
 > 0  
  
    
  
Generate Initial Structures for 
Materials Predicted to be Stable
Relax Structures with Symmetry 
Constraints to Validate Predictions
Proposed Discovery Workflow
Compare Predicted 
Energies Against Known 
Convex Hull of Stability 
Figure 1. Coarse-graining materials space using Wyckoﬀ representations enables eﬃcient data-driven ma-
terials discovery.A machine learning powered materials discovery workﬂow that takes advantage of the beneﬁts of the
proposed Wyckoﬀ representation. The workﬂow uses a machine learning model to predict formation energies for candidate
materials in an enumerated library of Wyckoﬀ representations (shapes are used to denote diﬀerent Wyckoﬀ positions and
colours to denote diﬀerent element types). These predicted formation energies are then compared against the known convex
hull of stability. Structures satisfying the required symmetries are then generated and relaxed for materials predicted to be
stable. The calculated energies of the relaxed structures can then be compared against the known convex hull to conﬁrm
whether the candidate is stable.
structure as the model input [19–22]. Inference using
these models is signiﬁcantly cheaper than the DFT cal-
culations they approximate, but sadly their application
to materials discovery is circular because arriving at a
DFT-relaxed structure necessitates calculating the en-
ergy using DFT multiple times.
Several groups have therefore proposed to use
composition-based inputs [6–9], which avoid the up-
front need for structure identiﬁcation. However, the
composition is not expressive enough to diﬀerentiate
polymorphs. This is a signiﬁcant shortcoming as diﬀer-
ent polymorphs can have radically diﬀerent properties,
most famously the example of diamond and graphite.
As such, we turn to model inputs that can distinguish
polymorphs whilst also avoiding the cost of DFT. Such
models can be used to triage which DFT calculations
are carried out in materials discovery workﬂows, allow-
ing for more eﬃcient use of computational resources.
In crystallography, one way to completely specify the
crystal structure of a material is via a combination of:
1) the spacegroup of the structure, 2) the dimensions
of its unit cell, and 3) a set of Wyckoﬀ positions with
the elements that sit on them. The Wyckoﬀ positions
describe sites that map onto equivalent sites under the
symmetry transformations of the given spacegroup [23].
As a consequence, a single Wyckoﬀ position can encode
the positions of multiple atoms. To construct model
inputs from sets of Wyckoﬀ positions, we discard the
information about the exact positions and lattice pa-
rameters. In the resulting coordinate-free representa-
tion, the Wyckoﬀ representation, each Wyckoﬀ position
is simply labelled by a Wyckoﬀ letter and the element
at that position. Consequently, as the Wyckoﬀ repre-
sentation is discrete, it is possible to computationally
enumerate Wyckoﬀ representations that represent can-
didate materials for use in screening campaigns.
The procedure of obtaining the Wyckoﬀ representa-
tion from a crystal structure can be viewed as a coarse-
graining process that takes us from an unsymmetrised
initial parameter space of size 4N + 6, through the
symmetrised Wyckoﬀ position space of maximum size
5M + 6, to the much smaller coordinate-free space of
Wyckoﬀ representations with size2M, whereN is the
number of sites in the unit cell and the corresponding
number of Wyckoﬀ positionsM satisﬁes M≤N. The
back mapping from the coarse-grained Wyckoﬀ repre-
sentation to the full structure can often be satisfacto-
rily obtained via a single symmetry constrained DFT-
relaxation of a prototype structure (see Figure 1).
To use the Wyckoﬀ representation as the input for a
machine learning model, we formulate the task of prop-
erty prediction as a multi-set regression problem. A
message-passing neural network architecture based on
the Roost architecture [8] is used to do this – theRoost
model performs materials property prediction via set
regression on the weighted set of elements in a mate-
rial’s composition.
The principal idea behind the model architecture is
to embed the coordinate-free Wyckoﬀ positions of a
given material into a vector space. The representations
in this embedded space are then updated via message
passing operations that consider all directed pairwise
combinations of members in the multi-set. The mes-
sages propagate contextual information between Wyck-

[page 3]
3
oﬀ positions leading to the emergence of material-
speciﬁc representations. These message passing stages
are repeated multiple times before a permutation in-
variant pooling operation is applied to the multi-set
to get a ﬁxed-length representation. As the labelling of
Wyckoﬀ positions includes several choices of setting, we
carry out on-the-ﬂy augmentation of equivalent Wyck-
oﬀ representations. We then average the ﬁxed-length
representations for these equivalent inputs to ensure
invariance to this choice. These averaged ﬁxed-length
representations are then fed into a feed-forward output
neural network that returns the models predictions.
This work focuses primarily on models that predict
the formation energy of inorganic crystalline materi-
als, although the proposed framework and inputs are
applicable to any material property. We call the pro-
posed model Wren (Wyckoﬀ Representation regres-
sioN). Throughout this work, we train Deep Ensembles
consisting of 10 Wren models starting from diﬀerent
random initialisations [24], allowing us to estimate the
model’s uncertainty as well as providing better point
estimates. Details of the Wren architecture and the
hyper-parameters used are given in the Supplementary
Information.
B. Selecting Stable Materials from Diverse
Chemical Space
To accelerate the screening of materials space for
novel stable materials, a model must reduce the ex-
pected number of calculations needed to ﬁnd a can-
didate below the known convex hull (here taken to be
the convex hull of the MP data set before cleaning). We
ﬁrst assess the ability of the model to generalise across
materials space to unseen combinations of elements.
To do this, we consider two data sets: (i) The Materi-
alsProject(MP)database[25]whichisahighlycurated
database of high-throughput DFT calculations. At the
time of access, the Materials Project database contains
approximately 140k crystal structures. We apply a
canonicalisation and cleaning treatment (see Materials
andMethods)thatleavesaﬁnalMPdatasetcontaining
approximately 105k distinct materials; (ii) The WBM
dataset, obtained from [16]. The dataset contains cal-
culated energies and properties of a large number of
crystal structures that were generated through the sub-
stitution of elements in known crystal structures from
MP with chemically similar elements [26]. As such,
the WBM dataset chemically extrapolates from the MP
dataset. After de-duplication and cleaning the WBM
data set contains approximately 215k materials.
We make predictions for the formation energies of the
materials contained in the WBM data set using aWren
model trained on the MP data set. We then assess how
well the Wren model selects potentially stable materi-
als from the WBM data set. The relevant metrics are;
the prevalence – the proportion of materials below the
known convex hull (actual positives), the precision –
how many of the predictions of potentially stable ma-
terials are correct (i.e. the ratio of true predicted pos-
itives to the total predicted positives), and the recall
– how many of the actual materials below the known
convex hull are found (i.e. the ratio of true predicted
0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
EHull MP / eV per atom
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14MAE / eV per atom
Corrected
GGA DFT
Accuracy
GGA DFT
Accuracy
| EHull MP| > MAE
40 meV
Figure 2. Wren’s average error is below DFT error
in the region around the stability threshold.Rolling
mean absolute error on the WBM data set as the energy
to the convex hull is varied forWren model. A scale bar is
shown for the windowing period of 40 meV per atom used
when calculating the rolling average. The standard error in
the mean is shaded around each curve. The highlighted V-
shaped region shows the area in which the average absolute
error is greater than the energy to the known convex hull –
this is the region where the model is most at risk of miss-
classifying structures. In the majority of this regionWren’s
accuracy is well below the 100 meV per atom threshold con-
sidered to be the accuracy of semi-local DFT across diverse
chemistries [29] and comparable to the∼ 50 meV per atom
threshold characteristic of ﬁtted correction schemes [30–32].
positives to actual positives). In this setup, the ratio of
the precision and the prevalence gives the enrichment
factor or degree of acceleration. Enrichment factors are
frequently reported for virtual screening campaigns in
drug discovery applications [27, 28].
The precision using the Wren model to triage cal-
culations is 38%. Consequently, given that the preva-
lence of theoretically stable materials in the WBM data
set is 15%, using Wren leads to an enrichment factor
of 2.5. As enrichment here is computed with respect
to the active search strategy of Ref. [16] this trans-
lates into a signiﬁcant improvement in eﬃciency over
random or exhaustive search strategies as our improve-
ments compound multiplicatively with theirs. Conse-
quently, triaging screening workﬂows based on Wren
should enable more materials below the known hull to
be identiﬁed with limited computational resources. We
also observe a high recall of 76%, meaning thatWren
misses relatively few potentially stable materials.
Thescreeningperformanceofthemodelcanbetuned
by adjusting our triage criteria. For example, an
alternative triage criterion would be to require that
∆ ˆEHull-Pred + ˆσ <0 where ∆ ˆEHull-Pred is the pre-
dicted distance of a candidate material from the known
convex hull and ˆσis the predictive uncertainty of the
model. This uncertainty adjusted criterion encour-
ages the model to suggest candidates it is more certain
about, leading to an increased precision of 53%. The

[page 4]
4
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Number of Calculations
0
2
4
6
8
10Enrichment Factor
Ti Zn N
10 meV
20 meV
30 meV
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Number of Calculations
0
2
4
6
8
10
Zr Zn N
10 meV
20 meV
30 meV
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Number of Calculations
0
2
4
6
8
10
Hf Zn N
10 meV
20 meV
30 meV
Figure 3. Wren accelerates the recovery of low energy structures in unseen chemical systems.The ﬁgures
show how the enrichment factor varies as we useWrento direct exploration of the Ti-Zn-N, Zr-Zn-N and Hf-Zn-N chemical
systems. The enrichment factor is the ratio of candidates found satisfying a given triage criterion to the number we would
expect to ﬁnd via a random search. The enrichment factor is plotted for candidates within 10, 20 and 30 meV per atom
from the convex hull of the full explored system. A light-grey guideline is included to show the performance expected from
a random model – an enrichment factor of 1. The plots demonstrate that usingWren leads to a signiﬁcant degree of early
enrichment of low energy structures.
enrichment factor for the uncertainty adjusted criterion
is 3.5. Consequently, the choice of triage criteria should
depend on the aims of a given workﬂow – the expected
opportunity cost of false negatives vs false positives, the
availability of experimental or computational resources,
and how easy it is to expand the candidate pool.
The strong performance of Wren can be explained
by looking at how the mean absolute error changes as a
function of the distance from the known convex hull.
Figure 2 shows that near to the stability threshold,
∆EHull-MP = 0, Wren makes highly accurate predic-
tions of the formation energy.
More signiﬁcant errors are seen for materials far
above and far below the hull. However, in these regions,
the average error is less than the energy to the convex
hull, meaning that the model’s classiﬁcations are still
reliable. The large errors far above the hull are due to
the routine underestimation of the formation energy of
unstable structures. This underestimation is a manifes-
tation of a bias in the MP data set towards structures
with low formation energies. The bias arises from the
fact that large numbers of the initial structures in the
MP data set are sourced from the ICSD [33]. This re-
sult highlights the importance of negative examples for
building generally applicable machine learning models
[34–36].
C. Exploration of Unseen Tertiary Phase
Diagrams
From an applications perspective, researchers are
often interested in exploring a single or small num-
ber of chemical systems that have not previously been
studied. Typical approaches for computationally map-
ping out the convex hull of novel chemical systems
[37, 38] are highly expensive, often requiring thousands
of structures to be relaxed.
To evaluate the ability ofWren to assist when map-
ping the phase diagrams of targeted chemical systems,
we consider the TAATA data set [39], consisting of 3
highly sampled ab-initio phase diagrams for the Hf-Zn-
N, Ti-Zn-N and Zr-Zn-N ternary systems. The ternary
systems studied in the TAATA data set were investi-
gated for their potential in piezoelectric devices and
energy harvesting applications. We focus on ternary
systems due to the fact that whilst crystal structure
prediction approaches such as [37, 38] work very well
for unary and binary systems, there has been less work
applying these methods to ternary systems [40–42] due
to the combinatorial explosion in the number of can-
didates that need to be relaxed per phase diagram to
obtain reliable results – often in excess of 10,000 relax-
ations are carried out for each chemical system.
The TAATA data set contains a diverse range of sta-
ble and unstable structures for each composition (Full
details about the construction of the TAATA data set
are given in the Supplementary Information as well as
in [39]). After applying a canonicalisation and clean-
ing treatment (See Materials and Methods), we are left
with 3,104 entries over 523 compositions in the Ti-Zn-N
phase diagram, 2,711 entries over 453 compositions in
the Zr-Zn-N phase diagram, and 3,381 entries over 596
compositions in the Hf-Zn-N phase diagram.
We trained Wren on the MP data set but excluded
all the tertiary compounds from the Ti-Zn-N, Zr-Zn-N
and Hf-Zn-N chemical systems. This model was then
used to predict the energies of tertiary compounds in
the TAATA data set. These formation energy predic-
tions were then used to construct hypothetical convex
hulls for the Ti-Zn-N, Zr-Zn-N and Hf-Zn-N chemi-
cal systems (See Supplementary Information). Figure
3 shows how selecting which relaxations to carry out
based on the predicted distances to the hypothetical
convex hulls constructed using theWren model’s pre-
dictions can accelerate phase diagram exploration. To
quantifythiseﬀectwelookattheenrichmentfactorasa
function of the number of calculations. The enrichment
factor describes the ratio between the number of candi-
dates found satisfying a target criterion when employ-
ing a given virtual screening strategy and the number
of positive candidates that hypothetically would have

[page 5]
5
Figure 4. Wren enables automated computational
prospecting of new stable materials.Data-mined sub-
stitution probabilities are used to generate novel candidates
for screening. A heat-map of the data-mined log substi-
tution probabilities for the ﬁrst 36 main group elements is
shown in the top left. The matrix captures known chemi-
cal trends, for example, that halogens can often be substi-
tuted for each other in crystal structures. Using the Wyckoﬀ
representation regression allows far more unrelaxed candi-
dates to be considered than possible in conventional DFT-
led high-throughput workﬂows. The funnel diagram shows
the number of unrelaxed candidates that pass the diﬀerent
stability criteria when ﬁltering based on the predictions of
the Wren model. In total 4,721 out of 5,675 validation cal-
culations completed. Of these 1,569 were below the known
convex hull, giving a precision of 33% amongst the com-
pleted calculations.
been found if the candidates were screened randomly.
Considering materials within 20 meV per atom of the
DFT-calculated convex hull as our target criteria, we
see that after 250 calculations we have a high enrich-
ment factor of 5.4 in the Ti-Zn-N chemical system, 5.1
for the Zr-Zn-N chemical system, and 4.5 for the Hf-
Zn-N chemical system when using theWrenmodel, i.e.
we are saving 4.5-5.4x compute resource compared to a
random search.
D. Computational Prospecting for Novel Stable
Materials
Having established the promise of Wyckoﬀ represen-
tation regression in predicting the stability of unseen
materials, we deployWrenon the prospective challenge
of discovering new theoretically stable materials. For
this stage, we trainedWrenon the union of the MP and
WBM data sets. This combined data set contains ap-
proximately 322k materials after canonicalisation and
cleaning. We randomly sampled 5% of the data set to
use as a test set and trained on the remaining 95%. The
resulting model has a mean absolute error of 31 meV
per atom on this test set, which is below the commonly
quoted chemical accuracy level of 1 kcal per mol (43
meVperatom)[43]. Themodel’saccuracyasafunction
of training set size follows a power-law relationship (see
Supplementary Information). Reassuringly, the model
does not appear to saturate in performance, suggest-
ing that the representation is rich enough and further
increases in model performance can be unlocked given
more data [44–46].
Whilst the coarse-grained space of Wyckoﬀ represen-
tations is computably enumerable and far smaller than
the inﬁnite space of atomic coordinates, attempting
materials discovery by exhaustively screening all pos-
sible Wyckoﬀ representations for general chemistries is
computationally ineﬃcient as the prevalence of stable
materials remains vanishingly low even in the coarse-
grainedspace. Toeﬀectivelytacklethetaskofmaterials
discovery in general chemistries, it is necessary to ﬁrst
construct a design space with a higher expected preva-
lence [13]. To do this we draw inspiration from previ-
ous work [15, 16] and generate candidates for screening
by making elemental substitutions in crystal structures
that are near to the known convex hull. Focusing on the
use machine learning to accelerate workﬂows tackling
general chemistries is particularly compelling as false
positive and false negative data produced in such work-
ﬂows can subsequently be used to retrain the model.
Inclusion of a diverse range of negative examples in the
training data is key to improving performance in tar-
geted exhaustive workﬂows, such as in Section C, where
design space enrichment is not applicable.
Toobtainoursubstitutionprobabilities, weextracted
39,164 ordered structures from the ICSD [33, 47] and
binned them according to their Wyckoﬀ representa-
tions. Within each prototype, all pairs of structures
are compared and we count which element substitu-
tions (including self substitutions) would be needed to
change one structure into the other [26]. We only con-
sider substitutions where all Wyckoﬀ positions sharing
one element-type are changed simultaneously and not
per position substitutions. Once normalised, the rows
of the count matrix can be interpreted as substitution
probabilities for each element.
Using these data-mined probabilities, we generated
a screening library of materials by substituting diﬀer-
ent elements into structures taken from the MP data
set. We only consider initial structures from the MP
data set with energies above the convex hull less than
100 meV per atom. This choice of this threshold means
that we should be including most metastable structures
within the MP data set. We consider 10 diﬀerent sub-
stitutions for each initial structure. Candidates that
have the same composition as materials already present
intheunionoftheMPandWBMdatasetsareremoved
from the library. Lanthanide and actinide-based ma-
terials and materials containing Noble elements were
also excluded. This workﬂow produced a screening li-
brary of approximately 415k candidates. The size of
the screening library can be readily increased by con-
sidering more elemental substitutions per structure.
Despite constraining our screening set to be close to
known materials, it is likely that we are still asking

[page 6]
6
the model to make predictions in areas of materials
space where it lacks support from the training data. As
shown on the WBM data set, uncertainty estimation
allows us to reduce the risk in our materials screen-
ing process by factoring our model’s uncertainty into
our triage criterion. For simplicity we use the same
simple uncertainty adjusted criterion considered previ-
ously; ∆ ˆEHull-Pred + ˆσ <0. In total 5,675 candidates
satisﬁed this screening criterion (See Figure 4).
Validation with DFT resulted in 4,721 completed cal-
culations across 4,464 unique compositions. Of these,
1,569 structures were conﬁrmed to be below the convex
hull of the MP data set, 1,369 below the convex hull
of the union of the MP and WBM data sets. There-
fore, the precision for the completed calculations was
33% with respect to the MP convex hull, conﬁrming
the workﬂow’s ability to accelerate materials discovery.
Although direct comparisons are not strictly permis-
sible, as previous prospective searches using machine
learning have been restricted to single prototypes, the
Wyckoﬀ representation based approach presented sig-
niﬁcantly surpasses previously reported precision’s of
4% [14] and 13% [22]. Another key consideration for
materials discovery is whether the model is able to gen-
eralise and make novel discoveries or simply interpolate
current knowledge. Out of the 4,721 completed calcu-
lations 269 were assigned to AFLOW prototypes for
which there were no isopointal prototypes in the train-
ing set. Of these 78 were conﬁrmed to be below the
convex hull of the union of the MP and WBM data
sets. Developing workﬂows to directly target the dis-
covery of structures for which no isopointal prototypes
exist remains a key challenge for future work.
III. DISCUSSION
In this work, we introduced the concept of using
coarse-graining to accelerate materials discovery. We
developed the framework of Wyckoﬀ representation re-
gression, Wren, and applied it to predict the formation
energy of materials. Wren collapses an inﬁnite search
space of atomic coordinates into a combinatorially enu-
merable search space enabling eﬃcient data-driven ex-
ploration of materials space. On a set of challenging
tasks curated from the literature, we ﬁnd that our ap-
proach can accurately map the phase diagrams of un-
seen chemical systems and is∼3x better at ﬁnding sta-
ble materials than current methods based on elemental
substitutions.
We developed a materials prospecting pipeline us-
ing Wren. As a proof-of-concept, we identiﬁed 1,558
new materials below the known convex hull from just
5,675 calculations. These results demonstrate that
leveraging Wyckoﬀ representation regression allows for
moreeﬃcientandextensiveexpansionofcomputational
material science databases. Such eﬀorts are crucial
to expedite the search for a wide variety of indus-
trially desirable materials required for the transition
to a low-carbon economy, e.g. thermoelectrics [48],
piezoelectrics[39], fast-ionconductors[49], highvoltage
multi-valent cathode materials [50], and caloric mate-
rials [51].
IV. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Wren Model Architecture
The bulk of the Wren architecture directly mim-
ics that of Roost [8] and we refer the readers there
for an in-depth description of how the message pass-
ing is formulated. The principle diﬀerence between
the two architectures comes in that the nodes on the
dense graph now represent the diﬀerent Wyckoﬀ posi-
tions rather than the diﬀerent elemental species (See
Figure 5). The elemental information is encoded us-
ing the ‘matscholar’ embedding from [52] which has
a dimensionality ofdel = 200. The remainder of the
node embedding comprises the Wyckoﬀ position em-
bedding (described below) plus the fractional multiplic-
ity of that Wyckoﬀ position within the unit cell. The
combined dimensionality of the Wyckoﬀ proportion of
the embedding isdwyk = 445.
To reduce the total dimension of the node embed-
dings, we project both the elemental and Wyckoﬀ em-
beddings into lower-dimensional spaces using learnt
aﬃne transformations. The low dimension embeddings
are then concatenated to give the node embeddings. In
this work we chosed∗
el = 32 andd∗
wyk = 32 giving a to-
tal dimensionality ofd = 64 for the node embeddings.
We use 3 message passing layers, each with a sin-
gle attention head. We chose single-hidden-layer neural
networks with 256 hidden units and LeakyReLU activa-
tion functions for both parts of the soft-attention mech-
anism. The output network consists of a feed-forward
neural network with skip connections and ReLU activa-
tion functions. The output network used has 4 hidden
layers containing 256, 256, 128, and 64 hidden units
respectively.
B. Wyckoﬀ Position Embedding
In total across the 230 crystallographic spacegroups
in 3D there are 1,731 diﬀerent Wyckoﬀ positions. The
embedding we use is made up of 3 parts; a one-hot
encoding of the crystal system (of which there are
6), a one-hot encoding of the Bravais lattice centring
(of which there are 5), and an encoding constructed
from the sum of multi-hot encodings of the equivalent
sites within a given Wyckoﬀ position (See Figure 5).
To construct the multi-hot encodings, we ﬁrst collate
all the sites within all the allowed Wyckoﬀ positions
as recorded on the Bilbao crystallographic server [53].
Each site can be broken apart into its oﬀset and alge-
braic terms (whether the position corresponds to a line,
a plane, etc.), e.g.
(−x +y + 1/4,y,z + 3/4) = (1/4, 0, 3/4) +
(−x +y,y,z ) (1)
From this, we construct separate one-hot encodings for
the unique algebraic and unique oﬀset positions. We
end up with 185 unique algebraic positions and 248
unique oﬀset positions. A Wyckoﬀ position is then rep-
resented by a sum of the embeddings of all the allowed
sites. The resulting embedding has a dimensionality
of 444 with the 1,731 Wyckoﬀ positions being encoded

[page 7]
7
Figure 5. Breakdown of diﬀerent components of the
Wyckoﬀ position embeddings. The Wyckoﬀ position
embeddings are made up of two parts. First, the Wyckoﬀ
proportion of the embedding that is comprised of 3 sub-
sections encoding the crystal system, Bravais centring and
equivalent sites in the Wyckoﬀ positions. Second, the ele-
mental embedding for which we take the ‘matscholar’ em-
bedding from [52].
into 1038 unique embeddings. This embedding is de-
signed to try and expose as many possible correlations
as possible that might exist between diﬀerent Wyckoﬀ
positions. As an illustrative example the embeddings
for the f Wyckoﬀ position ofFm ¯3 (No. 202),F432 (No.
209), andFm ¯3m(No. 225)areallthesame. Thisarises
as they are all face-centred cubic lattices that describe
the positions of 32 atoms within the unit cell at ((0, 0,
0), (0, 1/2, 1/2), (1/2, 0, 1/2), (1/2, 1/2, 0))⊕((x, x,
x), (-x, -x, x), (-x, x, -x), (x, -x, -x), (-x, -x, -x), (x, x,
-x), (x, -x, x), (-x, x, x)), where x is a free-coordinate
of the Wyckoﬀ positions. The embedding vector has 4’s
in the positions corresponding to the (x, x, x), (-x, -x,
x), (-x, x, -x), (x, -x, -x), (-x, -x, -x), (x, x, -x), (x, -x,
x), (-x, x, x) algebraic terms and 8’s in the positions
corresponding to the (0, 0, 0), (0, 1/2, 1/2), (1/2, 0,
1/2), (1/2, 1/2, 0) oﬀset terms. In principle further
engineering of this embedding could be carried out to
encode more prior knowledge, however, for the sizes of
data set considered in this work the beneﬁt of doing so
is likely to be marginal.
C. Invariance to Equivalent Wyckoﬀ
Representations
The categorisation of Wyckoﬀ positions depends on
a choice of origin [54]. As such, there is not a unique
mapping between the crystal structure and the Wyck-
oﬀ representation. To ensure the model is invariant to
the choice of origin, we perform on-the-ﬂy augmenta-
tion of Wyckoﬀ positions with respect to this choice of
origin (See Figure 6). The augmented representations
are averaged at the end of the message passing stage
Figure 6. On-the-ﬂy augmentation of equiva-
lent Wyckoﬀ representations ensures invariance to
equivalent descriptions. The labelling of Wyckoﬀ posi-
tions includes a choice of setting, in order to ensure that
our model is invariant to these choices we perform on the
ﬂy augmentation of all equivalent Wyckoﬀ representations
and then average the augmented embeddings before they
are fed into the output network.
to provide a single representation of equivalent Wyck-
oﬀ representations to the output network. By pool-
ing at this point we ensure that the model is invariant
and that its training is not biased towards materials for
which many equivalent Wyckoﬀ representations exist.
D. Evaluation of Wyckoﬀ Positions
For this work, we primarily make use ofspglib [55]
to determine the spacegroup and Wyckoﬀ positions for
the structures in the data sets. We set the tolerance
thresholds as 0.1 Å for positions and 5◦for angles
(Note, these are the same tolerances as used in Ma-
terials Project to calculate the spacegroup). In real
materials, we often observe some degree of oﬀ-site re-
laxation away from high-symmetry sites. Depending
on the level of anisotropy and the symmetry ﬁnder’s
tolerance threshold, this might result in materials be-
ing classed as P1. As lower symmetry Wyckoﬀ rep-
resentations encode less information about the struc-
ture, the symmetry ﬁnder tolerance is an important
hyper-parameter to bear in mind. However, prelimi-
nary investigations showed that varying the tolerance
thresholdbetweentypicalvaluesof0.01Åand0.1Ådid
not signiﬁcantly impact model accuracy on the TAATA
data set. We note that as an alternative to manual se-
lection of tolerance hyper-parameters, symmetry ﬁnd-
ers with adaptive tolerances, such asaflow-sym [56],
could be used for the identiﬁcation of the spacegroup
and Wyckoﬀ positions. However, given that we did not
observe any appreciable improvement in accuracy us-
ing aflow-sym and adaptive-schemes are typically as-
sociated with greater computational cost,spglib was
picked over other symmetry ﬁnders due to its speed.
E. Model Training
Throughout this work, we train Deep Ensembles of
10 models starting from diﬀerent random initialisations
for each data setup and architecture considered.

[page 8]
8
All the models examined in this work were trained
using the AdamW optimiser [57] with a ﬁxed learning
rate of3×10−4. A mini-batch size of 128 and a weight
decay parameter of 10−6 were used for all the experi-
ments. The models were trained for 400 epochs (cycles
through the training set).
Formally Deep Ensembles require the use of a proper
scoring rule for training. Therefore, we train all models
to minimise the following robust L1 loss function which
is an example of a proper scoring rule for regression
[58, 59],
L =
∑
i
√
2
ˆσa,θ(xi)∥yi−ˆµθ(xi)∥1 +log
(
ˆσa,θ(xi)
)
(2)
where ˆµθ(xi) and ˆσa,θ(xi)2 are a predictive mean and
predictive aleatoric variance outputted by the model,
and yi is the target label.
The expectations, ˆy(xi), and epistemic uncertainties,
ˆσa(xi)2 from the ensemble are calculated as
ˆy(xi) = 1
W
W∑
w
ˆµθw(xi), (3)
ˆσ2
e(xi) = 1
W
W∑
w
(
ˆy(xi)−ˆµθw(xi)
)2
, (4)
where the indexw runs over theW members of the en-
semble. The total uncertainty of the ensemble expec-
tation is simply the sum of the epistemic contribution
and the average of the aleatoric contributions from each
model in the ensemble.
ˆσ2(xi) = ˆσ2
e(xi) + 1
W
W∑
w
ˆσ2
a,θw(xi). (5)
F. Canonicalisation and Cleaning
All the data used to train models in this work went
throughacanonicalisationandcleaningprocess. Tables
I, II, and III show how much data is discarded at each
stage.
The canonicalisation stage removes higher energy
structures that have equivalent Wyckoﬀ representations
to other structures in the data set.
We adopt the same canonicalisation scheme as used
by the AFLOW prototype encyclopedia [60, 61]. Most
structures removed by canonicalisation are triclinic, as
the lack of symmetries in triclinic systems results in
many distinct structures mapping to the same Wyckoﬀ
representation.
For the WBM data set we carried out cleaning based
on the relaxed structures and relaxed Wyckoﬀ repre-
sentations. We removed elemental structures in the
WBM data set to ensure that our end-points for cal-
culating formation energies were consistent. The union
of the MP and WBM data sets used to train theWren
model for the prospective validation made use of an ear-
lier cannonicalisation scheme which led to it containing
some duplicated Wyckoﬀ representations. In total the
union of MP and WBM used contained 322,915 mate-
rials.
Table I. Table showing the the impact of cleaning criteria
on the MP data set.
Filter Number
Full Data Set 139,367
Lowest Energy Canonical Representations 129,190
Formation Energy less than 5 eV per atom 129,176
Less than 16 Wyckoﬀ Positions 108,656
Less than 64 sites in Crystal Structure 105,057
Volume per site less than 500 Å3 104,878
Table II. Table showing the the impact of cleaning criteria
on the WBM data set.
Filter Number
Full Data Set 257,486
Lowest Energy Canonical Representations 224,498
After Removal of Duplicates Found in MP 217,085
Excluding Pure Systems 216,877
Formation Energy less than 5 eV per atom 216,859
Less than 16 Wyckoﬀ Positions 216,819
Less than 64 sites in Crystal Structure 216,807
Volume per site less than 500 Å3 216,806
Table III. Table showing the the impact of cleaning criteria
on the TAATA data set.
Filter Number
Full Data Set 12,815
Lowest Energy Canonical Representations 9,688
Less than 16 Wyckoﬀ Positions 9,490
Less than 64 sites in Crystal Structure 9,190
Volume per site less than 500 Å3 9,190
G. Prospective Density Functional Theory
Settings
The validation of predictions in our materials
prospecting pipeline was carried out using Kohn-Sham
DFT with the plane wave pseudopotential codeVASP
[62, 63]. Projector augmented wave (PAW) type
pseudopotentials [64, 65] were used with the Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalised gradient approxi-
mation exchange-correlation functional [66]. All cal-
culations were done using a 520 eV plane-wave energy
cutoﬀ. The pseudopotentials and Hubbard- U values
were selected to ensure compatibility with data con-
tained in the Materials Project. The Materials Project
MaterialsProjectCompatibility correction scheme
implemented inpymatgenwas applied to allow the mix-
ing of GGA and GGA+U calculations [67]. We used
the High-Throughput Toolkit (httk v1.0) introduced
in Ref. [68] to manage the calculations.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The relaxed and initial structures for
the TAATA data set are available from
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5530535.
The MP data set used for this work was queried
from https://materialsproject.org [25] using the Mate-
rialsAPI[69]. ThedatawasqueriedfromSupplemental

[page 9]
9
Database Release V2021.03.22.
The relaxed structures for WBM data
set used in this work are available from
https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2021.68.
The pre-relaxation structures were obtained from the
original authors on request.
The ICSD [33, 47] can be accessed under license from
FIZ Karlsruhe—Leibniz Institut for Information Infras-
tructure at https://icsd.products.ﬁz-karlsruhe.de/.
The relaxed and initial structures for all com-
pleted prospective calculations are available from
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6345276.
CODE AVAILABILITY
A working version of the code is available at
https://github.com/CompRhys/aviary.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
REAG and AAL acknowledge the support of the
Winton Programme for the Physics of Sustainability.
AAL acknowledges support from the Royal Society.
FAF acknowledges funding from the Swiss National Sci-
ence Foundation (Grant No. P2BSP2_191736). RA
and ASP acknowledge support from the Swedish Re-
search Council (VR) Grant No. 2020-05402 and the
Swedish e-Science Centre (SeRC). The computations
were enabled by resources provided by the Swedish Na-
tional Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at NSC
partially funded by the Swedish Research Council
through grant agreement No. 2018-05973.
The authors thank Janosh Riebesell for valuable dis-
cussions regarding this work and Hai-Chen Wang and
co-authors for providing the pre-relaxation structures
for the WBM data set.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
REAG: Methodology, Software, Investigation, Visu-
alisation, Writing - Original Draft. ASP: Methodology,
Investigation, Validation. FAF: Conceptualisation, Su-
pervision, Writing - Review & Editing. RA: Concep-
tualisation, Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing.
AAL: Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
[1] Daniel W Davies, Keith T Butler, Adam J Jackson,
Andrew Morris, Jarvist M Frost, Jonathan M Skelton,
and Aron Walsh. Computational screening of all sto-
ichiometric inorganic materials. Chem, 1(4):617–627,
2016.
[2] David K Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Ipar-
raguirre, Rafael Bombarell, Timothy Hirzel, Alán
Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P Adams. Convolutional net-
works on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In
Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 2224–2232, 2015.
[3] Jessica Vamathevan, Dominic Clark, Paul Czodrowski,
Ian Dunham, Edgardo Ferran, George Lee, Bin Li,
Anant Madabhushi, Parantu Shah, Michaela Spitzer,
and Others. Applications of machine learning in drug
discovery and development.Nature Reviews Drug Dis-
covery, 18(6):463–477, 2019.
[4] Lars Ruddigkeit, Ruud Van Deursen, Lorenz C Blum,
and Jean-Louis Reymond. Enumeration of 166 bil-
lion organic small molecules in the chemical universe
database GDB-17. Journal Of Chemical Information
And Modeling, 52(11):2864–2875, 2012.
[5] Jean-Louis Reymond. The chemical space project.Ac-
counts Of Chemical Research, 48(3):722–730, 2015.
[6] Bryce Meredig, Ankit Agrawal, Scott Kirklin, James E
Saal, JW Doak, Alan Thompson, Kunpeng Zhang,
Alok Choudhary, and Christopher Wolverton. Com-
binatorial screening for new materials in unconstrained
composition space with machine learning.Physical Re-
view B, 89(9):094104, 2014.
[7] Logan Ward, Ankit Agrawal, Alok Choudhary, and
Christopher Wolverton. A general-purpose machine
learning framework for predicting properties of inor-
ganic materials.npj Computational Materials, 2:16028,
2016.
[8] Rhys EA Goodall and Alpha A Lee. Predicting mate-
rials properties without crystal structure: Deep repre-
sentation learning from stoichiometry.Nature Commu-
nications, 11(1):1–9, 2020.
[9] Anthony Yu-Tung Wang, Steven K Kauwe, Ryan J
Murdock, and Taylor D Sparks. Compositionally re-
stricted attention-based network for materials property
predictions. npj Computational Materials, 7(1):1–10,
2021.
[10] Jonathan Schmidt, Jingming Shi, Pedro Borlido, Lim-
ing Chen, Silvana Botti, and Miguel AL Marques. Pre-
dictingthethermodynamicstabilityofsolidscombining
density functional theory and machine learning.Chem-
istry Of Materials, 29(12):5090–5103, 2017.
[11] Haiying Liu, Jiucheng Cheng, Hongzhou Dong, Jian-
guang Feng, Beili Pang, Ziya Tian, Shuai Ma, Fengjin
Xia, ChunkaiZhang, andLifengDong. Screeningstable
and metastable ABO3 perovskites using machine learn-
ing and the materials project.Computational Materials
Science, 177:109614, 2020.
[12] Ankit Jain and Thomas Bligaard. Atomic-position in-
dependent descriptor for machine learning of material
properties. Phys. Rev. B, 98:214112, Dec 2018.
[13] Kyoungdoc Kim, Logan Ward, Jiangang He, Amar Kr-
ishna, Ankit Agrawal, and C Wolverton. Machine-
learning-accelerated high-throughput materials screen-
ing: Discovery of novel quaternary heusler compounds.
Physical Review Materials, 2(12):123801, 2018.
[14] Felix A Faber, Alexander Lindmaa, O Anatole
Von Lilienfeld, and Rickard Armiento. Machine learn-
ing energies of 2 million elpasolite(ABC 2D6) crystals.
Physical review letters, 117(13):135502, 2016.
[15] Geoﬀroy Hautier, Chris Fischer, Virginie Ehrlacher,
Anubhav Jain, and Gerbrand Ceder. Data mined ionic
substitutions for the discovery of new compounds.In-
organic Chemistry, 50(2):656–663, 2011.

[page 10]
10
[16] Hai-Chen Wang, Silvana Botti, and Miguel AL Mar-
ques. Predicting stable crystalline compounds us-
ing chemical similarity. npj Computational Materials,
7(1):1–9, 2021.
[17] Gerbrand Ceder, Y-M Chiang, DR Sadoway, MK Ay-
dinol, Y-I Jang, and Biying Huang. Identiﬁcation
of cathode materials for lithium batteries guided by
ﬁrst-principles calculations. Nature, 392(6677):694–
696, 1998.
[18] Anubhav Jain, Yongwoo Shin, and Kristin A Persson.
Computational predictions of energy materials using
density functional theory. Nature Reviews Materials,
1(1):1–13, 2016.
[19] Kristof T Schütt, Huziel E Sauceda, P-J Kindermans,
Alexandre Tkatchenko, and K-R Müller. SchNet–a
deep learning architecture for molecules and materi-
als. The Journal Of Chemical Physics, 148(24):241722,
2018.
[20] Tian Xie and Jeﬀrey C Grossman. Crystal graph con-
volutional neural networks for an accurate and inter-
pretable prediction of material properties.Physical Re-
view Letters, 120(14):145301, 2018.
[21] Chi Chen, Weike Ye, Yunxing Zuo, Chen Zheng, and
Shyue Ping Ong. Graph networks as a universal ma-
chine learning framework for molecules and crystals.
Chemistry Of Materials, 31(9):3564–3572, 2019.
[22] Cheol Woo Park and Chris Wolverton. Developing an
improved crystal graph convolutional neural network
framework for accelerated materials discovery.Physical
Review Materials, 4(6):063801, 2020.
[23] Ralph Walter Graystone Wyckoﬀ.The Analytical Ex-
pression Of The Results Of The Theory Of Space-
groups, volume 318. Carnegie Institution Of Washing-
ton, 1922.
[24] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and
Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive un-
certainty estimation using deep ensembles. InAdvances
In Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6402–
6413, 2017.
[25] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoﬀroy Hautier,
Wei Chen, William Davidson Richards, Stephen Dacek,
Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Ger-
brand Ceder, and Others. Commentary: The materi-
als project: A materials genome approach to accelerat-
ing materials innovation.APL Materials, 1(1):011002,
2013.
[26] Henning Glawe, Antonio Sanna, EKU Gross, and
Miguel AL Marques. The optimal one dimensional pe-
riodic table: A modiﬁed pettifor chemical scale from
data mining. New Journal Of Physics, 18(9):093011,
2016.
[27] Andreas Bender and Robert C Glen. A discussion of
measures of enrichment in virtual screening: Compar-
ing the information content of descriptors with increas-
ing levels of sophistication.Journal Of Chemical Infor-
mation And Modeling, 45(5):1369–1375, 2005.
[28] Niu Huang, Brian K Shoichet, and John J Irwin.
Benchmarking sets for molecular docking.Journal Of
Medicinal Chemistry, 49(23):6789–6801, 2006.
[29] Scott Kirklin, James E Saal, Bryce Meredig, Alex
Thompson, Jeﬀ W Doak, Muratahan Aykol, Stephan
Rühl, and Chris Wolverton. The open quantum materi-
als database (oqmd): Assessing the accuracy of dft for-
mation energies. npj Computational Materials, 1(1):1–
15, 2015.
[30] Vladan Stevanović, Stephan Lany, Xiuwen Zhang, and
Alex Zunger. Correcting density functional theory for
accurate predictions of compound enthalpies of forma-
tion: Fitted elemental-phase reference energies.Physi-
cal Review B, 85(11):115104, 2012.
[31] Rico Friedrich, Demet Usanmaz, Corey Oses, Andrew
Supka, Marco Fornari, Marco Buongiorno Nardelli,
Cormac Toher, and Stefano Curtarolo. Coordination
corrected ab initio formation enthalpies.npj Computa-
tional Materials, 5(1):1–12, 2019.
[32] Amanda Wang, Ryan Kingsbury, Matthew McDer-
mott, Matthew Horton, Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping
Ong, Shyam Dwaraknath, and Kristin Persson. A
framework for quantifying uncertainty in DFT energy
corrections, May 2021.
[33] G Bergerhoﬀ, ID Brown, F Allen, and Others. Crys-
tallographic databases. International Union Of Crys-
tallography, Chester, 360:77–95, 1987.
[34] Paul Raccuglia, Katherine C Elbert, Philip DF Adler,
Casey Falk, Malia B Wenny, Aurelio Mollo, Matthias
Zeller, Sorelle A Friedler, Joshua Schrier, and Alexan-
der J Norquist. Machine-learning-assisted mate-
rials discovery using failed experiments. Nature,
533(7601):73–76, 2016.
[35] Jonathan Schmidt, Mário RG Marques, Silvana Botti,
and Miguel AL Marques. Recent advances and appli-
cations of machine learning in solid-state materials sci-
ence. npj Computational Materials, 5(1):1–36, 2019.
[36] MK Horton, S Dwaraknath, and KA Persson. Promises
and perils of computational materials databases.Na-
ture Computational Science, 1(1):3–5, 2021.
[37] Chris J Pickard and RJ Needs. Ab initio random struc-
ture searching.Journal Of Physics: Condensed Matter,
23(5):053201, 2011.
[38] Yanchao Wang, Jian Lv, Li Zhu, and Yanming Ma.
CALYPSO: A method for crystal structure prediction.
Computer Physics Communications , 183(10):2063–
2070, 2012.
[39] Christopher Tholander, CBA Andersson, Rickard
Armiento, Ferenc Tasnadi, and Björn Alling. Strong
piezoelectric response in stable TiZnN2, ZrZnN2, and
HfZnN2 found by ab initio high-throughput approach.
Journal Of Applied Physics, 120(22):225102, 2016.
[40] Alexander G Kvashnin, Christian Tantardini, Hayk A
Zakaryan, Yulia A Kvashnina, and Artem R Oganov.
Computational search for new W-Mo-B compounds.
Chemistry of Materials, 32(16):7028–7035, 2020.
[41] Ziheng Lu, Bonan Zhu, Benjamin WB Shires, David O
Scanlon, and Chris J Pickard. Ab initio random struc-
ture searching for battery cathode materials.The Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics, 154(17):174111, 2021.
[42] Simone Di Cataldo, Wolfgang von der Linden, and Lilia
Boeri. First-principles search of hot superconductivity
inla-xhternaryhydrides. npj Computational Materials,
8(1):1–8, 2022.
[43] Felix A Faber, Luke Hutchison, Bing Huang, Justin
Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, George E Dahl, Oriol
Vinyals, Steven Kearnes, Patrick F Riley, and O Ana-
tole Von Lilienfeld. Prediction errors of molecular
machine learning models lower than hybrid dft er-
ror. Journal Of Chemical Theory And Computation,
13(11):5255–5264, 2017.
[44] K-R Müller, Michael Finke, Noboru Murata, Klaus
Schulten, and Shun-ichi Amari. A numerical study
on learning curves in stochastic multilayer feedforward
networks. Neural Computation, 8(5):1085–1106, 1996.
[45] FelixFaber, AlexanderLindmaa, OAnatoleVonLilien-
feld, andRickardArmiento. Crystalstructurerepresen-
tations for machine learning models of formation en-
ergies. International Journal Of Quantum Chemistry,
115(16):1094–1101, 2015.
[46] Felix A Faber, Anders S Christensen, Bing Huang,
and O Anatole Von Lilienfeld. Alchemical and struc-
tural distribution based representation for universal
quantum machine learning. The Journal Of Chemical

[page 11]
11
Physics, 148(24):241717, 2018.
[47] Mariette Hellenbrandt. The inorganic crystal structure
database (ICSD)—present and future.Crystallography
Reviews, 10(1):17–22, 2004.
[48] Shidong Wang, Zhao Wang, Wahyu Setyawan, Natalio
Mingo, and Stefano Curtarolo. Assessing the ther-
moelectric properties of sintered compounds via high-
throughput ab-initio calculations. Physical Review X,
1(2):021012, 2011.
[49] Austin D Sendek, Qian Yang, Ekin D Cubuk, Karel-
Alexander N Duerloo, Yi Cui, and Evan J Reed. Holis-
tic computational structure screening of more than
12000 candidates for solid lithium-ion conductor mate-
rials. Energy & Environmental Science, 10(1):306–320,
2017.
[50] Pieremanuele Canepa, Gopalakrishnan Sai Gautam,
Daniel C Hannah, Rahul Malik, Miao Liu, Kevin G
Gallagher, Kristin A Persson, and Gerbrand Ceder.
Odyssey of multivalent cathode materials: Open
questions and future challenges. Chemical Reviews,
117(5):4287–4341, 2017.
[51] Nikolai A Zarkevich, Duane D Johnson, and Vitalij K
Pecharsky. High-throughput search for caloric materi-
als: The caloricool approach. Journal Of Physics D:
Applied Physics, 51(2):024002, 2017.
[52] Vahe Tshitoyan, John Dagdelen, Leigh Weston,
Alexander Dunn, Ziqin Rong, Olga Kononova,
Kristin A Persson, Gerbrand Ceder, and Anubhav
Jain. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent
knowledge from materials science literature. Nature,
571(7763):95, 2019.
[53] Mois Ilia Aroyo, Juan Manuel Perez-Mato, Cesar
Capillas, Eli Kroumova, Svetoslav Ivantchev, Gotzon
Madariaga, Asen Kirov, and Hans Wondratschek. Bil-
bao crystallographic server: I. databases and crys-
tallographic computing programs. Zeitschrift Für
Kristallographie-Crystalline Materials, 221(1):15–27,
2006.
[54] LL Boyle and JE Lawrenson. The origin depen-
dence of wyckoﬀ site description of a crystal structure.
Acta Crystallographica Section A: Crystal Physics,
Diﬀraction, Theoretical And General Crystallography,
29(4):353–357, 1973.
[55] Atsushi Togo and Isao Tanaka. Spglib: A software
library for crystal symmetry search. arXiv Preprint
ArXiv:1808.01590, 2018.
[56] David Hicks, Corey Oses, Eric Gossett, Geena Gomez,
Richard H Taylor, Cormac Toher, Michael J Mehl,
Ohad Levy, and Stefano Curtarolo. AFLOW-
SYM: Platform for the complete, automatic and self-
consistent symmetry analysis of crystals. Acta Crys-
tallographica Section A: Foundations And Advances,
74(3):184–203, 2018.
[57] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight
decay regularization. In 7th International Confer-
ence On Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New
Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net,
2019.
[58] David A Nix and Andreas S Weigend. Estimating the
mean and variance of the target probability distribu-
tion. InProceedings Of 1994 Ieee International Confer-
ence On Neural Networks (ICNN’94), volume 1, pages
55–60. IEEE, 1994.
[59] Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we
need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? In
Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 5574–5584, 2017.
[60] Michael J Mehl, David Hicks, Cormac Toher, Ohad
Levy, Robert M Hanson, Gus Hart, and Stefano Cur-
tarolo. Theaﬂowlibraryofcrystallographicprototypes:
Part 1.Computational Materials Science, 136:S1–S828,
2017.
[61] David Hicks, Michael J Mehl, Eric Gossett, Cormac
Toher, Ohad Levy, Robert M Hanson, Gus Hart, and
StefanoCurtarolo. Theaﬂowlibraryofcrystallographic
prototypes: Part 2. Computational Materials Science,
161:S1–S1011, 2019.
[62] Georg Kresse and Jürgen Furthmüller. Eﬃciency of
ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semi-
conductors using aplane-wavebasis set.Computational
Materials Science, 6(1):15–50, 1996.
[63] Georg Kresse and Jürgen Furthmüller. Eﬃcient iter-
ative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations
using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B,
54(16):11169, 1996.
[64] Peter E Blöchl. Projector augmented-wave method.
Physical Review B, 50(24):17953, 1994.
[65] Georg Kresse and Daniel Joubert. From ultrasoft pseu-
dopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method.
Physical Review B, 59(3):1758, 1999.
[66] John P Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzer-
hof. Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Physical Review Letters, 77(18):3865, 1996.
[67] Anubhav Jain, Geoﬀroy Hautier, Shyue Ping Ong,
Charles J Moore, Christopher C Fischer, Kristin A
Persson, and Gerbrand Ceder. Formation enthalpies
by mixing GGA and GGA+U calculations. Physical
Review B, 84(4):045115, 2011.
[68] Rickard Armiento. Database-Driven High-Throughput
Calculations And Machine Learning Models For Ma-
terials Design, pages 377–395. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2020.
[69] Shyue Ping Ong, Shreyas Cholia, Anubhav Jain,
Miriam Brafman, Dan Gunter, Gerbrand Ceder, and
Kristin A Persson. The materials application program-
ming interface (api): A simple, ﬂexible and eﬃcient
api for materials data based on representational state
transfer (rest) principles.Computational Materials Sci-
ence, 97:209–215, 2015.

[page 12]
SI: Rapid Discovery of Stable Materials by Coordinate-free Coarse Graining
Rhys E. A. Goodall,1 Abhijith S. Parackal,2 Felix A. Faber,1 Rickard Armiento,2 and Alpha A. Lee1
1Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping University, Sweden
I. SYMMETRY CHANGES DURING
SYMMETRY CONSTRAINED RELAXATIONS
Carrying out a symmetry constrained relaxation in
VASP prevents symmetry breaking, but in some in-
stances, we can see the merger of distinct Wyckoﬀ po-
sitions into higher symmetry Wyckoﬀ positions. This
can lead to a change in the Wyckoﬀ representation in
screening workﬂows between the pre-relation and re-
laxed structures. To ensure that we have a well-deﬁned
map, we trainWren models to learn the target proper-
ties as a function of the relaxed Wyckoﬀ representation.
A change in Wyckoﬀ representation was observed in
29,417 out of 257,486 materials in the WBM data set.
Consequently, the Wyckoﬀ representation appears to
change during relaxation for approximately 10% of can-
didates produced using prototype-based substitution
workﬂows.
II. ENRICHMENT AS A FUNCTION OF
DISTANCE TO THE CONVEX HULL
Figure S1 shows a stacked histogram of the energy
to the convex hull of the full MP data set for the mate-
rials from the WBM data set. The histogram sections
Figure S1. Wren eﬃciently identiﬁes stable struc-
tures when screening diverse chemical spaces.His-
togram of the energy to the convex hull for materials in the
WBM data set. The histogram is broken down into true
positives, false negatives, false positives, and true negatives
based on whether theWrenmodel predicts candidates to be
below the known convex hull.Wren exhibits a high recall
with the majority of materials below the convex hull being
correctly identiﬁed by the model.
are coloured according to whether theWrenmodel cor-
rectly predicts a candidate to be below the known con-
vex hull given its Wyckoﬀ representation.
III. EXTRAPOLATION IN MATERIAL SPACE
The WBM data set was generated using an itera-
tive wo